Aaronic Priesthood
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/aaronic-priesthood-study-guide?lang=eng

“Aaronic Priesthood,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Aaronic Priesthood

Holding the keys of the gospel of repentance and baptism for the remission of sins

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, followers of God strive to assist Him in the work of salvation and exaltation. The priesthood, or the eternal power and authority of God, has been restored to the earth to help God’s children return to Him by making and keeping sacred covenants with Him.

The priesthood is organized into two parts, each with responsibility for important aspects of gospel living. The Aaronic Priesthood is the “preparatory” or “lesser” priesthood. It holds the keys of the ministering of angels, of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins (see Doctrine and Covenants 13:1 ). Aaronic Priesthood holders prepare, bless, and administer the sacramental bread and water. They also minister in temporal aspects of the Church, such as watching over its members and collecting fast offerings.

What Is the Aaronic Priesthood?

The priesthood is the eternal power and authority of God. Holders of the priesthood assist God in bringing about the salvation and exaltation of His children by providing sacred covenants and ordinances. The Aaronic Priesthood is an appendage to the higher Melchizedek Priesthood (see Doctrine and Covenants 107:1, 6, 13–14 ). In the Church today, worthy male members may receive the Aaronic Priesthood beginning in January of the year they turn 12. Offices in the Aaronic Priesthood include deacon, teacher, priest, and bishop.

Topic overview: Aaronic Priesthood

Related gospel study guides: Restoration of the Priesthood , Melchizedek Priesthood , Priesthood Keys

Section 1

John the Baptist Restored the Aaronic Priesthood to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery

From the time of Adam to Moses, prophets held the Melchizedek Priesthood. But then during Moses’s ministry, the Israelites refused Jehovah’s blessings and this higher priesthood was withdrawn from the people generally. The prophets continued to hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. Male members of the tribe of Levi, including Aaron’s descendants, were given the Aaronic Priesthood. (See Doctrine and Covenants 84:23–27 ).

As a descendant of Aaron and a firstborn son, John the Baptist held the Aaronic Priesthood (see Doctrine and Covenants 68:16–18 ; 84:26–27 ). After the deaths of Jesus and His Apostles, people made unauthorized changes to priesthood ordinances and the Church. Because of this apostasy, the Aaronic Priesthood, along with the higher priesthood conferred on Peter, James, John, and other disciples of Christ ( Luke 9:1–2 ), were taken from the earth. In 1829, the resurrected John the Baptist appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and conferred upon them the Aaronic Priesthood, restoring this authority again to the earth (see Doctrine and Covenants 13:1 ; 27:7–8 ; Joseph Smith—History 1:68–72 ).

Things to think about

The life and ministry of John the Baptist can be a source of inspiration to Aaronic Priesthood holders today. Read Matthew 11:7–13 (including the Joseph Smith Translation in verse 13, footnote a ); Luke 7:24–30 ; and John 5:32–35 . What do you learn from these verses about how the Savior feels about John the Baptist? Why do you think Jesus described John this way? How can disciples of Jesus Christ today emulate the example of John the Baptist?

In his address “ The Aaronic Priesthood—a Gift from God ,” President Gordon B. Hinckley taught, “It is [deacons’, teachers’, and priests’] responsibility to watch over the Church and see that there is no iniquity and to invite all to come unto Christ.” In the Church today, many holders of the Aaronic Priesthood are young men. How can these young people meaningfully fulfill these duties in their wards and branches today?

Activity for learning with others

Oliver Cowdery’s account of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood adds context and detail to our understanding of what happened that day. Read his account found at the end of Joseph Smith—History . Invite group members to share which details are particularly meaningful to them. Then invite group members to imagine what it might have been like to be with Joseph and Oliver that day. Why do you think this event was essential to the Restoration of the gospel?

Learn more

Exodus 28:1–4 ; Leviticus 8:1–13 ; Doctrine and Covenants 84:18

Thomas S. Monson, “ The Priesthood—a Sacred Gift ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2015, 88–90

“ The Restoration of the Priesthood Authority and Organization ” (video), Gospel Library

Saints: The Story of the Church of Jesus Christ in the Latter Days , vol. 1, The Standard of Truth, 1815–1846 (2018), 65–75

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 79–87

Section 2

The Aaronic Priesthood Provides Essential Keys and Service

The Aaronic Priesthood is sometimes known as the “lesser” priesthood and is referred to in scripture as “an appendage to” the Melchizedek Priesthood ( Doctrine and Covenants 107:14 ). But the Aaronic Priesthood holds essential power and authority to provide sacred covenants and ordinances that are necessary for salvation and exaltation.

The Aaronic Priesthood includes the keys of the ministering of angels, of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins (see Doctrine and Covenants 13:1 ; 107:20 ).

Things to think about

John the Baptist prepared the way for the world to receive Jesus Christ. He taught the gospel of repentance and of baptism for the remission of sins, and he even baptized the Savior (see Mark 1:1–11 ; John 1:15–34 ). Why do you think these principles and ordinances were considered essential preparation for Christ’s coming? How do repentance and baptism prepare disciples of Christ today to receive temple ordinances and to make and keep the associated covenants?

Speaking to Aaronic Priesthood holders about Doctrine and Covenants 13 , President Gordon B. Hinckley admonished: “I urge you to open the Doctrine and Covenants … and to read these words and memorize them. They are the charter of the priesthood. … They are evidence that this priesthood is valid and genuine in every respect.” How might Doctrine and Covenants 13 direct a young priesthood holder’s focus and actions? How can understanding these truths about the Aaronic Priesthood help all Church members understand the value of ordinances such as baptism and partaking of the sacrament each week and the covenants associated with them?

Activity for learning with others

It is important for all members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to understand the duties and blessings of the Aaronic Priesthood, but many Church members don’t realize just how essential the ordinances and responsibilities of the Aaronic Priesthood are. Your group can learn about the rights and responsibilities of the Aaronic Priesthood by studying the following sources, either individually or in small groups:

The Aaronic Priesthood: General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , chapter 10 , Gospel Library; Doctrine and Covenants 107:85–88

The keys of the ministering of angels: Doctrine and Covenants 13:1 ; 84:26 ; 107:20

The preparatory gospel: Doctrine and Covenants 13:1 ; 84:26–27 ; 107:20

Power in administering outward ordinances: Doctrine and Covenants 84:26–27 ; 107:20 ; Bible Dictionary, “ Aaronic Priesthood ”

Once group members have read the references above, invite them to share with the rest of the group what they learned.

Learn more

Matthew 3 ; Luke 3:1–22

Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Aaronic Priesthood and the Sacrament ,” Ensign , Nov. 1998, 37–40

Dale G. Renlund, “ The Priesthood and the Savior’s Atoning Power ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 64–67

“ Keys of the Aaronic Priesthood ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Section 3

The Aaronic Priesthood Is the Preparatory Priesthood

For generations, the Aaronic Priesthood prepared the children of Israel for the higher law eventually given by Jesus Christ. John the Baptist’s mission was to prepare the world for Christ’s coming. Therefore, the Aaronic Priesthood became known as “the preparatory priesthood.” The scriptures also teach that the Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys of the preparatory gospel, which includes repentance and baptism for the remission of sins (see Doctrine and Covenants 84:26–27 ).

Today, holders of the Aaronic Priesthood help prepare the world for the Second Coming of Jesus Christ. They help people prepare to make and keep covenants and receive ordinances in the house of the Lord by repenting of sin and being baptized. And holding the Aaronic Priesthood also prepares followers of Jesus Christ for a lifetime of service in the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Things to think about

The Aaronic Priesthood quorum theme can help each young man understand his divine identity and his purpose as a priesthood holder. Read the theme, found in General Handbook , 10.1.2 . How do you think this theme inspires young men to make righteous choices? What aspects of the Aaronic Priesthood quorum theme can you incorporate better into your own discipleship?

The ordinances and covenants received through the Aaronic Priesthood prepare us for those associated with the Melchizedek Priesthood. How can repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, the sacrament, and living the associated covenants prepare you to make and keep the covenants and receive the ordinances of the house of the Lord?

Activity for learning with others

The Aaronic Priesthood is an essential part of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as a whole, but it also blesses individual priesthood bearers. Watch the video “ Let Every Man Learn His Duty: Aaronic Priesthood ” (3:34). How do you think holding the priesthood influences these young men’s decisions? As your group listens to various young men share what priesthood power and authority mean to them, invite group members to share their impressions and ideas.

Learn more

Henry B. Eyring, “ The Preparatory Priesthood ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2014, 59–62

Gary E. Stevenson, “ Your Priesthood Playbook ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 47–50

“ Aaronic Priesthood Shining Forth ” (video), Gospel Library

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Harold B. Lee (2011), 89–98

Other Resources about the Aaronic Priesthood

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Resources for Teaching Children

Notes

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ The Aaronic Priesthood—a Gift from God ,” Ensign , May 1988, 46.

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ The Priesthood of Aaron ,” Ensign , Nov. 1982, 44.
