Aaronic Priesthood
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/aaronic-priesthood?lang=eng

“Aaronic Priesthood,” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Aaronic Priesthood

The priesthood is the eternal power and authority of God. The Aaronic Priesthood is often called the preparatory priesthood. Those who hold the Aaronic Priesthood can prepare to receive the higher Melchizedek Priesthood .

As a young man serves in the Aaronic Priesthood, he also prepares to receive the blessings of the temple , to serve a full-time mission, to be a loving husband and father, and to continue to serve the Lord throughout his life.

The Aaronic Priesthood was restored to the earth when it was given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on May 15, 1829, by John the Baptist. In the Church today, worthy male members may receive the Aaronic Priesthood beginning in January of the year they turn 12. Those who hold the Aaronic Priesthood, typically young men ages 11–17, receive many opportunities to participate in sacred priesthood ordinances and give service. Men who are age 18 or older when they join the Church also receive the Aaronic Priesthood. They serve with that priesthood while they prepare to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood.

As Aaronic Priesthood holders worthily fulfill their duties, they represent God and act in His name to help others receive the blessings of the gospel .

Offices of the Aaronic Priesthood

The offices of the Aaronic Priesthood are deacon, teacher, priest, and bishop.

Deacon. In the Church of Jesus Christ, young men can be ordained to the office of deacon beginning January 1 of the year they turn 12. With the authorization of the presiding priesthood leader (usually the bishop or branch president), deacons pass the sacrament. They help the bishop or branch president watch over Church members by giving service and assisting with temporal matters such as gathering fast offerings (where practical).

Teacher. Young men may be ordained to the office of teacher beginning January 1 of the year they turn 14. These young men can perform all the duties of deacons. They also have additional responsibilities such as preparing the sacramental bread and water and serving as ministering brothers.

Priest. Young men can be ordained to the office of priest beginning January 1 of the year they turn 16. They may perform all the duties of deacons and teachers. With the authorization of the presiding priesthood leader, they may also bless the sacrament, baptize, perform baptisms for the dead in the temple, and ordain others to the offices of priest, teacher, and deacon.

Bishop. A bishop is a man who has been ordained and set apart as the presiding high priest for a ward, or congregation. He has responsibility for overseeing the temporal and spiritual matters of the congregation. Bishops care for ward members with love and help them follow Jesus Christ. They receive revelation for the ward. They also provide welfare assistance from money donated to the Church to help those struggling financially or in other ways. In addition, they oversee the ward’s records and finances and the care and use of their local meetinghouse.

Aaronic Priesthood Quorums

A priesthood quorum is an organized group of men or young men who hold the priesthood. Quorum members “serve others, fulfill priesthood duties, build unity, and learn and live doctrine.” Quorums are organized for both the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthoods. The three quorums in the Aaronic Priesthood are the deacons quorum, teachers quorum, and priests quorum.

Aaronic Priesthood quorums are led by a president who is set apart, or given priesthood authority, to preside. For the deacons and teachers quorums, the president is a young man in the quorum; the bishop is the president of the priests quorum. The president is given the priesthood keys necessary—or the right—to fulfill the responsibilities of that calling. Where possible, Aaronic Priesthood quorums include counselors (for deacons and teachers quorums) and assistants (for priests quorums) called to support the president and to form a presidency. They may also include a quorum secretary when possible.

Related Topics

Bishop

Melchizedek Priesthood

Priesthood

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Videos

Resources for children

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

For more information, see 1 Timothy 3:10–13 ; Doctrine and Covenants 20:57–58, 60 ; 84:30, 111 ; 107:63, 85 .

For more information, see Doctrine and Covenants 20:53–60 ; 84:30, 111 .

For more information, see Doctrine and Covenants 20:46–52 and General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 10.3 .

For more information about a bishop’s responsibilities, see Doctrine and Covenants 72 ; 107:68–76 .

General Handbook , 8.1.1 ; see also section 10.1.1 .
