Abortion
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/abortion?lang=eng

“Abortion,” Topics and Questions (2026)

Overview

Abortion

We are all beloved spirit daughters and sons of heavenly parents. We are created in their image. We each have a divine nature and destiny.

Heavenly Father’s plan is for us to come to earth within a family to obtain a physical body, learn and grow as we experience the challenges of mortality, and reach our divine potential. We help accomplish God’s plan as we keep His commandment to bring His children to earth within the covenant of eternal marriage.

Abortion is a serious matter because the ability to create life is a sacred gift from God. He trusts us to use that gift responsibly.

Unanticipated Pregnancy

If you find out about an unanticipated pregnancy, you might experience many feelings, including feeling overwhelmed, scared, panicked, or ashamed. Abortion might feel like a way out.

As you make decisions, remember that you can find strength and hope from the Savior and your Heavenly Father as you turn to Them. Ponder, pray, search the scriptures, and seek God’s guidance. Counsel with trusted loved ones and Church leaders such as your bishop or Relief Society president.

Life Is Precious

The scriptures, ancient and modern, condemn taking life: “Thou shalt not … kill, nor do anything like unto it.” The General Handbook also states: “Elective abortion for personal or social convenience is contrary to God’s plan and His commandments. … Members must not submit to, perform, arrange for, pay for, consent to, or encourage an abortion.”

We can help and strengthen the mother and father involved in an unanticipated or unwed pregnancy by showing them our love and support. Elder Neil L. Andersen has taught, “When a woman and a man are in such a fragile time, facing a crucial choice, our words, our hands, our hearts—spiritually, emotionally, and financially—can bless them to feel the Savior’s love.”

Exceptions of when it may be justifiable to have an abortion include when a competent physician declares that the life or health of the mother is in serious jeopardy; when competent medical authorities know that the fetus has severe defects that would not allow the baby to survive beyond birth; and when the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest.

In these circumstances, the decision to have an abortion should be made only after careful consideration. As you prayerfully make this decision, remember that Heavenly Father will never abandon you.

Depending on your situation, some possible alternatives to elective abortion are marriage , shared parenting , and adoption .

If an Unjustified Abortion Has Occurred

If you have had or participated in an unjustified abortion, know that God’s love for you provides an opportunity for you to repent and be forgiven. The General Handbook teaches, “A person who seeks forgiveness with ‘godly sorrow’ ( 2 Corinthians 7:10 ; see also 3 Nephi 9:20 ) and ‘full purpose of heart’ ( 3 Nephi 18:32 ) may repent and be forgiven for the sin of [unjustified] abortion.” You can find comfort and peace as you trust in God and Jesus Christ.

For Further Information

You can find the Church’s official statement on abortion on the Newsroom site.

Related Topics

Adoption

Birth control

Chastity

Children of God

Family

Marriage

Revelation

Single and pregnant

Related Content

Messages from Church leaders

Notes

See “ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library.

See Alma 37:37 .

Doctrine and Covenants 59:6 ; see also Exodus 20:13 .

General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 38.6.1 , Gospel Library.

Neil L. Andersen, “ Cherishing Life ,” Liahona , May 2025, 30.

See General Handbook , 38.6.1 .

See Deuteronomy 31:8 ; Joshua 1:5–6 .

General Handbook , 38.6.1 .
