Agency
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/agency-and-accountability-study-guide?lang=eng

“Agency,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Agency

The gift to choose and act for ourselves

Before you were born, you lived as a spirit son or daughter of God. You learned of Heavenly Father’s plan for you to progress and become like Him. He gave you the gift of moral agency, which means you have the freedom to either follow God and His plan or not (see Doctrine and Covenants 101:78 ). The principle of agency gives you the power to act for yourself ( 2 Nephi 2:16 ). It also means you take responsibility for your choices (see Helaman 14:29–31 ).

In the premortal world, Satan “sought to destroy the agency of man” ( Moses 4:3 ), and many followed after him (see Doctrine and Covenants 29:35–36 ). The fact that you’re here on earth means you used your agency to accept God’s plan and follow Him (see Abraham 3:24–26, 28 ). Through the guidance of the Holy Ghost, God will strengthen you in your efforts to use moral agency to follow Him. When you choose to be righteous, you will discover greater peace and joy and eventually qualify to receive eternal life.

What Is Agency?

God has given His children the ability and privilege to “act for themselves and not to be acted upon” (2 Nephi 2:26). This means we can choose whether or not to obey God’s commandments. We will experience consequences—good or bad—for our choices. God described this gift as “moral agency” ( Doctrine and Covenants 101:78 ).

Topic overview: Agency and Accountability

Related gospel study guides: Plan of Salvation , Premortal Life , Mortality , Obedience

Section 1

You Are Accountable for the Choices You Make in This Life

You make hundreds of choices every day in the things you think, say, and do. President Thomas S. Monson said that some of our decisions “will make no difference in the eternal scheme of things, and others will make all the difference.” With God’s help, you can know which choices matter the most.

One of the reasons God sends His children to earth is to “prove them … to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them” ( Abraham 3:25 ). In this world, you face “opposition in all things” ( 2 Nephi 2:11 ), countless opportunities to exercise your agency. Someday, you will be held accountable for your thoughts, words, and deeds (see Mosiah 4:30 ). How you use your moral agency will shape your experience in this life and in the world to come.

Things to think about

Elder David A. Bednar explained: “In the grand division of all of God’s creations, there are things to act and things to be acted upon (see 2 Nephi 2:13–14 ). … Endowed with agency, you and I are agents, and we primarily are to act and not just be acted upon.” How does this statement clarify the difference between God’s children and His other creations? Why do you think the principle of moral agency is an essential part of God’s plan for the salvation of His children?

Consider reading what Lehi taught his son Jacob about the importance of agency in 2 Nephi 2:26–29 . How would you describe the experiences of liberty and captivity mentioned in this passage? What does this passage teach you about how to “choose eternal life”?

Activity for learning with others

Watch the video “ The Ten Virgins ” (1:40) or read together the parable of the ten virgins in Matthew 25:1–13 . Discuss what this parable teaches about agency. Talk about ways you can choose to prepare to meet the Savior.

Learn more

2 Nephi 2:26 ; Alma 41:3–7 ; Helaman 14:30–31 ; Doctrine and Covenants 29:39 ; 58:27–28 ; 93:31–32 ; Moses 4:1–4

Russell M. Nelson, “ Choices for Eternity ” (worldwide devotional for young adults, May 15, 2022), Gospel Library

Russell M. Nelson, “ Let God Prevail ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2020, 92

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Opposition in All Things ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2016

D. Todd Christofferson, “ Moral Agency ,” Ensign , June 2009, 46–52

“ War in Heaven ” (video), Gospel Library

Section 2

Jesus Christ Chose to Do the Father’s Will in All Things

When Jesus was 12 years old, Mary and Joseph discovered He was not with their family as they traveled home from Jerusalem. They found Him at the temple answering questions from those who studied God’s law. Mary asked Jesus whether He was aware that they had been searching for Him. Jesus responded, “[Know] ye not that I must be about my Father’s business?” ( Luke 2:49 ). Jesus always made decisions based on His Father’s will (see Luke 22:42 ; 3 Nephi 11:11 ; 27:13 ). Jesus Christ is the perfect example of using moral agency to choose righteousness over self-interest and sin.

Things to think about

Jesus Christ faced temptations during His mortal life, just as we do (see Hebrews 4:15 ; Mosiah 3:7 ; Alma 7:11 ). Read Matthew 4:1–11 . What can you learn from Jesus’s response when Satan tried to get Him to choose unrighteously?

In the talk “ Overcome the World and Find Rest ,” President Russell M. Nelson said: “What does it mean to overcome the world? It means overcoming the temptation to care more about the things of this world than the things of God. It means trusting the doctrine of Christ more than the philosophies of men. It means delighting in truth, denouncing deception, and becoming ‘humble followers of Christ’ [ 2 Nephi 28:14 ]. It means choosing to refrain from anything that drives the Spirit away. It means being willing to ‘give away’ even our favorite sins [ Alma 22:18 ].” How can following the example of Jesus Christ guide your efforts to overcome the world?

What are some things that can hold you back from submitting to the Father’s will? What can you do to submit to Him more fully?

Activity for learning with others

Often our choices are not between right and wrong or good and evil. Read together the following statement by President Dallin H. Oaks: “As we consider various choices, we should remember that it is not enough that something is good. Other choices are better, and still others are best. Even though a particular choice is more costly, its far greater value may make it the best choice of all.” Talk about some principles that can help guide you when choosing between options that are good, better, or best. What can you learn from the example of Jesus Christ as you make those choices?

Learn more

Joshua 24:15 ; John 5:19 ; 6:38 ; 8:29 ; Mosiah 15:7

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Good, Better, Best ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2007, 104–8

Dale G. Renlund, “ Choose You This Day ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2018, 104–6

“ Know This, That Every Soul Is Free ,” Hymns , no. 240; “ I Will Follow God’s Plan ,” Children’s Songbook , 164–65

Section 3

Let God Prevail in Your Life

President Russell M. Nelson taught: “We all have our agency. … We can choose to let God prevail in our lives, or not. We can choose to let God be the most powerful influence in our lives, or not.” When you willingly decide to follow God in the choices you make, you show that His plan takes priority in your life.

Choosing to believe is one of the first steps in properly using your agency. Belief in Jesus Christ increases your faith and trust in Him. Christ also wants you to believe His words revealed through His prophets as the Restoration of the fulness of His gospel continues. As you choose to have faith and believe, you will receive greater spiritual understanding and find clarity when making decisions. Your desire to be obedient will increase, and you will more likely choose a path that leads to eternal life.

Things to think about

President Russell M. Nelson said: “Keep on the covenant path. Your commitment to follow the Savior by making covenants with Him and then keeping those covenants will open the door to every spiritual blessing and privilege available to men, women, and children everywhere.” What choices have helped you progress on the Lord’s covenant path? What choices will you make that will help you stay on the path?

Activity for learning with others

Invite others to talk about experiences when life did not turn out how they expected. Talk about the thoughts and feelings such experiences can produce. Consider reading Isaiah 55:8–9 together and discussing why the principle of letting God prevail brings peace and confidence.

Learn more

Proverbs 3:5–6 ; 1 Nephi 17:40 ; Mosiah 3:19

Russell M. Nelson, “ Let God Prevail ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2020, 92–95

Gerrit W. Gong, “ Choose to Let God Prevail ,” For the Strength of Youth , Aug. 2022, 2–5

Randall K. Bennett, “ Choose Eternal Life ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2011, 98–100

Other Resources about Agency

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Thomas S. Monson, “ The Three Rs of Choice ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2010, 67.

David A. Bednar, “ And Nothing Shall Offend Them ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2006, 90.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Overcome the World and Find Rest ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 96.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Good, Better, Best ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2007, 104–5.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Let God Prevail ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2020, 92.

Russell M. Nelson, “ As We Go Forward Together ,” Liahona , Apr. 2018, 7.
