Apostasy
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/apostasy?lang=eng

“Apostasy,” Topics and Questions (2023)

“,” Topics and Questions

Overview

Apostasy

Overview

When individuals or groups of people turn away from the principles of the gospel, they are in a state of apostasy. One example is the Great Apostasy, which occurred after the Savior established His Church. After the deaths of the Savior and His Apostles, men corrupted the principles of the gospel and made unauthorized changes in Church organization and priesthood ordinances . Because of this widespread apostasy, the Lord withdrew the authority of the priesthood from the earth. This apostasy lasted until Heavenly Father and His Beloved Son appeared to Joseph Smith in 1820 and initiated the Restoration of the fulness of the gospel.

Latter-day Saints believe that, through the priesthood conferred to Joseph Smith by the ministering of angels, the authority to act in God’s name was brought back to the earth. This is “restored,” not “reformed,” Christianity. Their belief in a restored Christianity helps explain why most Latter-day Saint converts, from the 1830s to the present, converted from other Christian denominations. None of these converts thought they were leaving Christianity; they are simply grateful to learn about, and become part of, the restored Church of Jesus Christ, which they believe offers a more complete and rich Christian Church spiritually, organizationally, and doctrinally.

During the Great Apostasy, people were without divine direction from living prophets. Many churches were established, but they did not have priesthood power to lead people to the true knowledge of God the Father and Jesus Christ. Parts of the holy scriptures were corrupted or lost, and no one had the authority to confer the gift of the Holy Ghost or perform other priesthood ordinances.

We now live in a time when the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored. But unlike the Church in times past, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will not be overcome by general apostasy. The scriptures teach that the Church will never again be destroyed (see Doctrine and Covenants 138:44 ; see also Daniel 2:44 ).

Although there will not be another general apostasy from the truth, we must each guard against personal apostasy by keeping covenants, obeying the commandments, following Church leaders, partaking of the sacrament, and constantly strengthening our testimonies through daily scripture study, prayer, and service.

Related Topics

Joseph Smith

Ordinances

Priesthood

Restoration of the Priesthood

Scriptures

Scripture References

Isaiah 24:5

Amos 8:11–12

Matthew 24:4–14

Acts 20:28–30

2 Timothy 3:1–5, 14–15

2 Timothy 4:3–4

1 Nephi 13:24–29

Mormon 1:13–14

Doctrine and Covenants 1:15–17

Joseph Smith—History 1:17–19

Scripture Study Resources

Topical Guide, “ Apostasy ”

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Apostasy ”

Index to the Triple Combination, “ Apostasy ”

Messages from Church Leaders

Apostasy and Restoration

President Dallin H. Oaks

From the Beginning

Elder Neal A. Maxwell

Additional Messages

Videos

“Apostasy—Jan”

“If They Harden Not Their Hearts”

“After the New Testament”

“The Scriptures and the Restoration”

“Stay in the Boat and Hold On!”

“The Great Apostasy”

Learning Resources

Church Magazines

S. Kent Brown, “ Whither the Early Church? ” Ensign, October 1988

Kent P. Jackson, “ Early Signs of the Apostasy ,” Ensign, December 1984

Andrew C. Skinner, “ Apostasy, Restoration, and Lessons in Faith ,” Ensign, December 1995

Study Manuals

“The Church of Jesus Christ in Former Times”

Gospel Principles, chapter 16

January 20–26: 1 Nephi 11–15

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: Book of Mormon 2020

October 21–27: 1 and 2 Thessalonians

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: New Testament 2019

“The Apostasy in Kirtland, 1836–38”

Church History in the Fulness of Times Student Manual, chapter 14

In the News

“ Authority in the Church ,” Newsroom

“ Church Leaders’ Message Addresses Doctrine, Questions ,” Newsroom

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“Beware the Bitter Fruits of Apostasy”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith, chapter 27

“Preventing Personal Apostasy”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young, chapter 12

“The Restoration of the Gospel”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Wilford Woodruff, chapter 1

Teaching Resources

Teaching Outlines

October 21–27: 1 and 2 Thessalonians

Come, Follow Me—For Primary: New Testament 2019

“Prelude to the Restoration”

Foundations of the Restoration Teacher Material, lesson 1

“The Great Apostasy”

Doctrine and Covenants and Church History Seminary Teacher Manual, lesson 3

Stories and Activities for Teaching Children

“ Apostasy ,” Lesson Helps for Teaching Children
