Atonement of Jesus Christ
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/atonement-of-jesus-christ-study-guide?lang=eng

Gospel Study Guide

Atonement of Jesus Christ

Our Savior’s sacrifice and our only way back to Heavenly Father

If you’ve ever been separated from someone you love, then you understand—to a small degree—why God the Father wants us to return and live with Him eternally. God loves us, and He sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to be our Savior. Jesus came to earth to bring us back to God.

Jesus accomplished this through His suffering and sacrifice—what the scriptures call the Atonement of Jesus Christ. Through His Atonement, Jesus overcame all the consequences of the Fall of Adam: pain and suffering as well as physical and spiritual death. He prepared the way for us not only to return to God’s presence but also to become like God. In that sense, Jesus can bring us closer to our Father in Heaven than we’ve ever been before.

To study the events associated with the Atonement of Jesus Christ, review the topic “ Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ .”

What Is the Atonement of Jesus Christ?

The Savior’s Atonement consists of His suffering in Gethsemane and on the cross, His death, and His Resurrection. Through this suffering Jesus Christ took upon Himself all our pains, sorrows, sins, and death, making it possible for us to return to the presence of God and receive eternal life.

Topic overview: Atonement of Jesus Christ

Related gospel study guides: Jesus Christ , Fall of Adam and Eve , Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ , Salvation , Plan of Salvation

Section 1

We Need a Savior—Jesus Christ

To understand how Jesus Christ saves us through His Atonement, it can help to consider why we need to be saved. What does Jesus save us from? Put another way, what causes the separation between us and God?

God is perfect, all-powerful, and immortal. We are imperfect, weak, and subject to death. That is partly our own fault—a result of our sins and poor choices. But it is also a result of living in a fallen world. (For more on that topic, see “ Fall of Adam and Eve .” Studying the Fall will help you understand the purpose and need for the Atonement of Jesus Christ more completely.)

Through His Atonement, Jesus Christ can cleanse us from sin and raises us from the dead. He can give us “strength beyond [our] own.” Jesus Christ was chosen by God, before the world was created, to be our Savior (see Moses 4:1–2 ; Abraham 3:26–27 ). In fact, He was the only one who could be our Savior.

Things to think about

If someone asked you “Why do I need a Savior?” what would you say? Read about how President Dallin H. Oaks answered a similar question in his message “ What Has Our Savior Done for Us? ” Then consider recording your feelings about what Jesus Christ has done for you.

The prophet Lehi taught that we can dwell with God only through “the merits, and mercy, and grace” of Jesus Christ ( 2 Nephi 2:8 ). Have you ever thought about what those merits are? What is it about Jesus Christ that makes Him the one—the only one—who could be our Savior? Ponder that as you read these scripture passages: Hebrews 4:15 ; 2 Nephi 2:6–9 ; Doctrine and Covenants 20:21–25 .

Activity for learning with others

Perhaps an object lesson could help you show how much we need a Savior. For example, you could create a path full of obstacles and roadblocks and compare it to our lives. Or maybe you could share experiences when you were helpless or in danger and needed someone to save you. (The video “ Where Justice, Love, and Mercy Meet ” [5:36] gives a good example.) This could lead to a conversation about why we all need Jesus Christ to save us.

Learn more

2 Nephi 9:3–26 ; Alma 34:9–12

Tad R. Callister, “ The Atonement of Jesus Christ ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 85–87

“ For God So Loved the World ” (video), Gospel Library

“ Blessings from Jesus ,” Friend , Feb. 2020, 8

Section 2

Jesus Christ Overcame Death for Us

There’s at least one thing that every person on earth has in common: we will all eventually die. Through His mother Mary, Jesus inherited the ability to die. But as the Son of God, He also had power over death. He rose from the dead, and by doing so He broke the chains of death that held us all captive. Because He was resurrected, all of us will be resurrected too and become immortal (see 1 Corinthians 15:20–22 ). That’s one way we become more like Heavenly Father, who has a glorified, immortal body.

Things to think about

In the Book of Mormon, Amulek’s teachings about resurrection changed Zeezrom’s life. Read Alma 11:42–46 to learn what Amulek told him, and ponder how understanding these truths might influence your life.

The Gospel Library has a collection of Easter videos that teach about the Resurrection of Jesus Christ and the hope and joy He offers us. Consider watching one or more of these videos. What feelings do you have for Jesus Christ as you watch these videos?

Activity for learning with others

Many prophets have spoken of the “sting” of death (see 1 Corinthians 15:55–57 ; Mosiah 16:7–8 ; Alma 22:14 ; Mormon 7:5 ). Why does it “sting” when someone we love dies? Talk about how your faith in Jesus Christ softens the sting of death for you.

Learn more

1 Corinthians 15

D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Resurrection of Jesus Christ ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2014, 111–14

Reyna I. Aburto, “ The Grave Has No Victory ,” Liahona , May 2021, 85–86

Section 3

Jesus Christ Overcame Sin for Us

Most of us are trying to be good people. But as hard as we try, we all do things we know we shouldn’t. We all sin, and that keeps us from being able to dwell in holiness and purity in God’s presence—it would not be just (see Alma 42:12–15 ). But God wants us to live forever in His presence, so He mercifully prepared a way for us to overcome the effects of sin: He sent Jesus Christ to take those sins upon Himself. Therefore, all those who sincerely repent can be forgiven and return to live with our Heavenly Father.

Things to think about

How does God’s plan make it possible for Jesus to pay the penalty for our sins? Consider studying Alma 42:9–27 with that question in mind. What thoughts and spiritual impressions come to you?

Activity for learning with others

Several hymns testify of Jesus Christ’s power to save us from our sins. Sacrament hymns do this especially well (see, for example, “ Reverently and Meekly Now ” or “ I Stand All Amazed ” ). You might consider singing or listening to a few of your favorites together. Are there any phrases in these hymns that build your faith in the Savior and His Atonement?

Learn more

Isaiah 1:16–18 ; 1 John 1:7–9 ; Doctrine and Covenants 45:3–5

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Cleansed by Repentance ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 91–94

Section 4

Jesus Christ Understands and Can Help Us

Your experiences—including your most difficult experiences—are yours. Others may have been through similar things, but there is only one person who knows perfectly how you feel. Jesus Christ “suffered pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind.” He took upon Himself “the pains and the sicknesses of his people” ( Alma 7:11 ). Why would He do that? So “that he may know according to the flesh how to succor [or help] his people according to their infirmities” ( Alma 7:12 ). He did it so that you would have someone to turn to, someone who understands, someone who has the ability and strength to help, no matter what you might be suffering (see Hebrews 4:14–16 ).

Things to think about

What difference does it make to you to know that the Savior has “borne [your] griefs, and carried [your] sorrows”? ( Isaiah 53:4 ). These scripture passages can help you ponder this question: Isaiah 41:10 ; John 14:18, 27 ; Doctrine and Covenants 122:5–9 .

Activity for learning with others

Have you ever wondered what it meant for the Savior to suffer “the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children”? ( 2 Nephi 9:21 ). Maybe you could brainstorm with others some of the pains that this would include—such as the physical and emotional pains that you’ve felt, that your loved ones have felt, and that you may have heard of from others. Your list won’t ever be complete, but how does your partial list affect the way you read Alma 7:11–13 ? How does knowing what Jesus Christ suffered affect the way you feel about Him?

Learn more

Isaiah 53:3–5 ; 2 Nephi 9:21

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Strengthened by the Atonement of Jesus Christ ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2015, 61–64

Neil L. Andersen, “ Wounded ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2018, 83–86; see also the video “ The Wounded Shall Be Healed ” (Gospel Library)

“ Where Can I Turn for Peace? ,” Hymns , no. 129

Other Resources about the Atonement of Jesus Christ

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

“ Lord, I Would Follow Thee ,” Hymns , no. 220.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ What Has Our Savior Done for Us? ,” Liahona , May 2021, 75–77.

“ Reverently and Meekly Now ,” Hymns , no. 185.

“ I Stand All Amazed ,” Hymns , no. 193.
