Atonement of Jesus Christ
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/atonement-of-jesus-christ?lang=eng

“Atonement of Jesus Christ,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Atonement of Jesus Christ

Overview

What is the Atonement?

As used in the scriptures, to atone is to suffer the penalty for sins, thereby removing the effects of sin from the repentant sinner and allowing him or her to be reconciled to God. Jesus Christ was the only one capable of carrying out the Atonement for all mankind. Because of His Atonement, all people will be resurrected, and those who obey His gospel will receive the gift of eternal life with God.

As descendants of Adam and Eve, all people inherit the effects of the Fall. In our fallen state, we are subject to opposition and temptation. When we give in to temptation, we are alienated from God, and if we continue in sin, we experience spiritual death, being separated from His presence. We are all subject to temporal death, which is the death of the physical body (see Alma 42:6–9 ; Doctrine and Covenants 29:41–42 ).

The only way for us to be saved is for someone else to rescue us. We need someone who can satisfy the demands of justice—standing in our place to assume the burden of the Fall and to pay the price for our sins. Jesus Christ has always been the only one capable of making such a sacrifice.

From before the Creation of the earth, the Savior has been our only hope for “peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come” ( Doctrine and Covenants 59:23 ).

Only He had the power to lay down His life and take it up again. From His mortal mother, Mary, He inherited the ability to die. From His immortal Father, He inherited the power to overcome death. He declared, “As the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself” ( John 5:26 ).

Only He could redeem us from our sins. God the Father gave Him this power (see Helaman 5:11 ). The Savior was able to receive this power and carry out the Atonement because He kept Himself free from sin: “He suffered temptations but gave no heed unto them” ( Doctrine and Covenants 20:22 ). Having lived a perfect, sinless life, He was free from the demands of justice. Because He had the power of redemption and because He had no debt to justice, he could pay the debt for those who repent.

Jesus’s atoning sacrifice took place in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross at Calvary. In Gethsemane He submitted to the will of the Father and began to take upon Himself the sins of all people. He has revealed some of what He experienced as He paid the price for our sins:

“I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

“But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

“Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

“Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men” ( Doctrine and Covenants 19:16–19 ; see also Luke 22:44 ; Mosiah 3:7 ).

The Savior continued to suffer for our sins when He allowed Himself to be crucified—“lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world” ( 1 Nephi 11:33 ).

On the cross, He allowed Himself to die. His body was then laid in a tomb until He was resurrected and became “the firstfruits of them that slept” ( 1 Corinthians 15:20 ). Through His death and Resurrection, He overcame physical death for us all.

Jesus Christ redeems all people from the effects of the Fall. All people who have ever lived on the earth and who ever will live on the earth will be resurrected and brought back into the presence of God to be judged (see 2 Nephi 2:5–10 ; Helaman 14:15–17 ). Through the Savior’s gift of mercy and redeeming grace, we will all receive the gift of immortality and live forever in glorified, resurrected bodies.

Although we are redeemed unconditionally from the universal effects of the Fall, we are accountable for our own sins. But we can be forgiven and cleansed from the stain of sin if we “apply the atoning blood of Christ” ( Mosiah 4:2 ). We must exercise faith in Jesus Christ, repent, be baptized for the remission of sins, and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Record Your Impressions

Related Topics

Cross

Death, Physical

Death, Spiritual

Easter

Faith in Jesus Christ

Forgiveness

Jesus Christ

Mercy

Repentance

Resurrection

Salvation

Scriptures

Scripture References

Isaiah 53

John 14:6

John 15:13

Romans 5:11

1 Corinthians 15:20–22

Hebrews 4:14–16

1 John 1:7

1 Nephi 10:6

2 Nephi 2:6–9

2 Nephi 25:23–26

Mosiah 3:1–19

Alma 22:14

3 Nephi 27:13–22

Moroni 10:32–33

Doctrine and Covenants 19:15–24

Scripture Study Resources

Topical Guide, “ Jesus Christ, Atonement through ”

Bible Dictionary, “ Atonement ,” “ Atonement, Day of ”

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Atone, Atonement ”

Index to the Triple Combination, “ Jesus Christ, Atonement through ”

Messages from Church Leaders

Personal Preparation for Temple Blessings

President Russell M. Nelson

The Atonement and Faith

President Dallin H. Oaks

Tomorrow the Lord Will Do Wonders among You

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland

The Atonement of Jesus Christ

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland

The Atonement of Jesus Christ

Brother Tad R. Callister

Testifying of the Great and Glorious Atonement

Elder Neal A. Maxwell

The Purifying Power of Gethsemane

Elder Bruce R. McConkie

Additional Messages

Videos

“For God So Loved the World”

“Jesus Is Scourged and Crucified”

“Jesus Is Condemned before Pilate”

“The Savior Suffers in Gethsemane”

“The Last Supper”

“Jesus Warns Peter and Offers the Intercessory Prayer”

Tabernacle Choir Videos

“ Come unto Jesus ”

“ I Stand All Amazed ”

“ O Divine Redeemer ”

Learning Resources

General Resources

“ Repentance ,” For the Strength of Youth

Church Magazines

“ Christ’s Atonement Is Evidence of God’s Love ,” Ensign, February 2017

Jonathan Taylor, “ The True Miracle of Healing ,” Ensign, February 2017

Elizabeth Lloyd Lund, “ Finding Peace in Imperfection ,” Ensign, February 2017

“ Scarlet, Crimson, Snow, and Wool ,” Ensign, December 2016

Study Manuals

“The Atonement”

Gospel Principles, chapter 12

“Repentance”

Gospel Principles, chapter 19

February 11–17: John 2–4

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: New Testament 2019

March 11–17: Matthew 10–12; Mark 2; Luke 7; 11

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: New Testament 2019

April 15–21: Easter

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: New Testament 2019

May 6–12: Luke 12–17; John 11

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: New Testament 2019

June 17–23: Matthew 27; Mark 15; Luke 23; John 19

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: New Testament 2019

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“Jesus Christ, the Divine Redeemer of the World”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith, chapter 3

“Accepting the Atonement of Jesus Christ”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young, chapter 5

“The Infinite Atonement of Jesus Christ”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: John Taylor, chapter 5

“The Power of the Atonement for Us Personally”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: John Taylor, chapter 6

“The Atonement of Jesus Christ”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Wilford Woodruff, chapter 7

“Jesus Christ Redeems All Mankind from Temporal Death”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith, chapter 10

“Jesus Christ Redeems the Repentant from Spiritual Death”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith, chapter 11

“Our Savior, Jesus Christ”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Fielding Smith, chapter 2

“The Lamb Slain from the Foundation of the World”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Harold B. Lee, chapter 3

Stories

Do Not Delay

President Henry B. Eyring

Always Remember Him

Elder Gerrit W. Gong

The Miracle of the Atonement

Elder C. Scott Grow

Waiting for the Prodigal

Elder Brent H. Nielson

The Atonement: Our Greatest Hope

President James E. Faust

Teaching Resources

Teaching Outlines

June 10–16: Matthew 26; Mark 14; Luke 22; John 18

Come, Follow Me—For Primary: New Testament 2019

June 17–23: Matthew 27; Mark 15; Luke 23; John 19

Come, Follow Me—For Primary: New Testament 2019

Stories and Activities for Teaching Children

“ Atonement ,” Lesson Helps for Teaching Children

Media

Music

“Rock of Ages,” Hymns, no. 111

“God Loved Us, So He Sent His Son,” Hymns, no. 187

“I Stand All Amazed,” Hymns, no. 193

“He Sent His Son,” Children’s Songbook, 34

“To Think about Jesus,” Children’s Songbook, 71

“The Third Article of Faith,” Children’s Songbook, 123
