Baptisms for the Dead
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/baptisms-for-the-dead?lang=eng

“Baptisms for the Dead,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Baptisms for the Dead

Jesus Christ taught that baptism is essential to the salvation of all who have lived on earth. 1 Many people, however, have died without being baptized. Others were baptized without proper authority . Because God is merciful, He has prepared a way for all people to receive the blessings of baptism. By performing proxy baptisms on behalf of those who have died, Church members offer these blessings to deceased ancestors. Individuals can then choose to accept or reject the ordinances that have been performed on their behalf.

Jesus Christ said, “Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.” 2 Even Jesus Christ Himself was baptized. 3

Many people have lived on the earth who never heard of the gospel of Jesus Christ and who were not baptized. Others lived without fully understanding the importance of the ordinance of baptism. Still others were baptized, but without proper authority.

Because He is a loving God, the Lord does not damn those people who, through no fault of their own, never had the opportunity for baptism. He has therefore authorized baptisms to be performed by proxy for them. A living person, often a descendant who has become a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is baptized on behalf of a deceased person. This work is done by Church members in temples throughout the world.

Some people have misunderstood that when baptisms for the dead are performed, deceased persons are baptized into the Church against their will. This is not the case. Each individual has agency , or the right to choose. The validity of a proxy baptism depends on the deceased person accepting it and choosing to accept and follow the Savior while residing in the spirit world . The names of deceased persons are not added to the membership records of the Church.

The New Testament indicates that baptisms for the dead were done during the time of the Apostle Paul. 4 This ordinance was restored with the establishment of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Related Topics

Postmortality

Related Content

Scriptures

Gospel study guide (Vicarious Ordinances for the Dead)

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

See John 3:5 .

John 3:5 .

See Matthew 3:13–17 .

See 1 Corinthians 15:29 .
