Bible
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/bible?lang=eng

“Bible,” Topics and Questions (2026)

Overview

Bible

The Bible is the word of God. It is a witness for God the Father and Jesus Christ. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are encouraged to study it and follow its teachings.

Bible Translations

The Church uses many translations of the Bible in various languages. In some languages, the Church publishes its own edition of the Bible, which includes footnotes, subject indexes, and other study aids.

Generally, members use a Church-preferred or Church-published edition of the Bible in Church classes and meetings. This helps maintain clarity in discussions and consistent understanding of doctrine. Other Bible translations may also be used.

Some individuals may benefit from translations that are both doctrinally clear and also easier to understand. Examples of such translations can be found in the Church’s Holy Bible list .

The Bible can be difficult to understand. It would be appropriate to use a simpler Bible translation for youth and children or any who would benefit.

Truths from the Bible

Latter-day Saints revere the Bible. They treasure its witness of the life and mission of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Prophet Joseph Smith studied the Bible all his life, and he taught its precepts. He testified that a person who can “mark the power of Omnipotence, inscribed upon the heavens, can also see God’s own handwriting in the sacred volume: and he who reads it oftenest will like it best, and he who is acquainted with it, will know the hand [of the Lord] wherever he can see it.”

The collection of sacred writings that we find in the Bible today is not complete, however. The Bible itself speaks of other authoritative books of scripture including books of Nathan the prophet and of Jehu, the prophecies of Enoch and Ahijah, the visions of Iddo the seer, and even missing epistles of Paul. Other books of Latter-day Saint scripture—the Book of Mormon , the Doctrine and Covenants , and the Pearl of Great Price —clarify the gospel as taught in the Bible and corroborate the truthfulness of the biblical witness of Jesus Christ. All of these volumes of scriptures, which Church members refer to collectively as the standard works, testify of the plan of our Heavenly Father and invite people to come unto Jesus Christ.

Neither is the Bible, as it is currently available, without error. Joseph Smith commented, “I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers.” As the Bible was compiled, organized, translated, and transcribed, errors were introduced into the text. Such errors become evident when you consider the many and often conflicting translations of the Bible that exist today. Many people are often puzzled by apparent contradictions and omissions. Many have also been curious about biblical prophets’ references to books or scriptural passages that are not currently in the Bible.

Continuing Revelation

Some claim that the Bible is the final word of God—more specifically, the final written word of God. But that is to claim more than the Bible claims for itself. Isolated Bible passages may seem to teach a closed canon, but historical context and other scriptural passages show that God’s word would continue to be revealed to His children.

As Latter-day Saint Christians, we believe that God continues to reveal His word through living prophets today.

Related Topics

Prophets

Revelation

Scriptures

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Bible Gospel Study Guide

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

See General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 38.8.40.1 .

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 66 .

See 2 Chronicles 9:29 ; 13:22 ; 20:34 ; 1 Corinthians 5:9 ; Jude 1:14 .

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 207 .

For more information, see Jeffrey R. Holland, “ My Words … Never Cease ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2008, 91–94; 2 Nephi 29 ; Articles of Faith 1:9 .
