Bible
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/bible-study-guide?lang=eng

“Bible,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Bible

Teaching faith in Jesus Christ to millions

The stories in the Bible date back thousands of years. They describe people, cultures, and situations that are often very different from ours today. And yet when we study the Bible, we find that much of it is familiar. We read about families who experience joy and conflict, individuals who hold on to their faith in the face of disappointment, and nations that experience wars and natural disasters. Most of all, we read about people seeking a connection to God—and who find it through their faith and hope in Jesus Christ.

What Is the Bible?

The Bible is the word of God. It contains writings by prophets and other inspired authors from the time of Adam and Eve to the days of the Apostles of Jesus Christ following His Resurrection. These writings include God’s commandments, His covenants, His revelations, and His interactions with His children. The Bible has two parts: the Old Testament and the New Testament. In the Old Testament, prophets testify of the coming of the Savior. The New Testament is a record of the life and ministry of Jesus Christ.

Related gospel study guides: Scriptures , Book of Mormon , Prophets , Revelation , Joseph Smith

Section 1

The Bible Is the Word of God and a Witness of Jesus Christ

As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we treasure and respect the Bible as the word of God. In the Bible, we learn the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which includes His commandments and teachings (see Doctrine and Covenants 42:12 ).

Jesus Christ is the focal point of the Bible. He is known by many names within its pages, such as Jehovah, Lord God, Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, Immanuel, and Lamb of God. His earthly mission was foretold by prophets in the Old Testament, and the New Testament gives eyewitness accounts of that mission (see Isaiah 9:6 ; John 20:31 ). The Bible testifies of God’s love for us, manifested through Jesus Christ, who made it possible for us to receive forgiveness of our sins and return to live in God’s presence. We can find comfort and guidance in studying the Bible as we strive to be disciples of Christ.

Things to think about

The Prophet Joseph Smith said of the Bible that “he who reads it oftenest will like it best, and he who is acquainted with it, will know [God’s] hand wherever he can see it.” How has the Bible strengthened your faith in Jesus Christ? What do you learn about God as you read it? Consider recording how you see His hand in the lives of those who lived in ancient times and how you have seen His hand in your life today.

When you seek wisdom or guidance, you can receive direction through God’s word. You could read Proverbs 3:5–6 ; Jeremiah 29:12–13 ; John 14:23 ; Colossians 3:16 ; and James 1:5 for examples of how the Lord gives us guidance through the Bible. Then write down a few Bible verses that have blessed you with hope and direction.

Activities for learning with others

We can come to know the Savior by studying the Bible, which witnesses of Jesus Christ. Consider reading together Exodus 3:6–14 ; Matthew 3:13–17 ; and Luke 2:25–38 for examples of how the Bible testifies of the Savior. You could also watch a Bible video about the Savior’s mortal ministry. Discuss what you learn from these accounts about Christ’s divine mission. How do both the Old Testament and the New Testament testify that Jesus is our Savior and Redeemer?

Some of the greatest events and revelations in the latter days have come about as prophets have studied the Bible. Read and discuss a few of those moments in Church history as recorded in Joseph Smith—History 1:10–20 ; Doctrine and Covenants 76:11–20 ; and Doctrine and Covenants 138:1–11 . As a group, you could then sing some hymns about the Restoration, such as “ Joseph Smith’s First Prayer ” or “ The Spirit of God .”

Learn more

2 Nephi 29:3–13 ; Doctrine and Covenants 33:16

Russell M. Nelson, “ Scriptural Witnesses ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2007, 43–45

D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Blessing of Scripture ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2010, 32–35

“ Scriptures Legacy ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Section 2

God Has Preserved the Holy Bible to Bless His Children

The fact that we have the Bible to study and learn from today is truly a miracle. Thanks to the Lord and courageous individuals in history, we can learn from this remarkable record, “which has turned men’s hearts for centuries, leading them to pray, to choose right paths, and to search to find their Savior.” This holy book helps us feel the Spirit of God.

Originally the Bible was written in Hebrew, Greek, and Aramaic. But over the centuries and many revisions of the book, some plain and precious truths were lost (see 1 Nephi 13:26–29 ; Articles of Faith 1:8 ). Because of this, God instructed the Prophet Joseph Smith to restore some of those truths in what is now called the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. The Prophet’s inspired translation demonstrates how important it is to the Lord that His children correctly understand the Bible and its teachings.

Things to think about

God’s word has endured throughout the ages to bless His children, and His word is everlasting. You could read Isaiah 40:8 ; John 1:1 ; and 1 Peter 1:25 to learn about the eternal nature of His word. What do these verses teach you about the gospel of Jesus Christ? How do they inspire you to increase your commitment to study the Bible?

Joseph Smith felt that making inspired revisions to the Bible was part of his calling as a prophet. While he had completed most of his translation of the Bible by 1833, he modified his work for publication up until his death in 1844. Consider reading the Joseph Smith Translation for Matthew 4:1–11 ; Matthew 18:11 ; and Mark 16:3–6 . How do these revisions change your understanding of each passage? Why is it important to you that these truths were restored?

Activity for learning with others

Because of the Bible, “tens of millions of individuals have come to a faith in God and in Jesus Christ.” What brought the Bible forth to so many? In President M. Russell Ballard’s talk “ The Miracle of the Holy Bible ,” you can learn about the sacrifices of those who gave their lives to bring us this sacred book of scripture. Or you may choose to watch a video about the Bible provided in the following languages:

English: “ King James Bible Anniversary ”

Spanish: “ Latter-day Saint Edition of the Holy Bible in Spanish ”

Portuguese: “ History of the Translation of Biblia Sagrada ”

After the video, you could share your feelings about those who helped make the Bible available to us today. How do their stories affect the way you think about and study the Bible?

Learn more

2 Timothy 3:15–17 ; Alma 37:6–10

Robert D. Hales, “ Preparations for the Restoration and the Second Coming: ‘My Hand Shall Be over Thee ,’” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2005, 89–90

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Joseph Smith Translation (JST) ,” Gospel Library

Church History Topics, “ Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible ,” Gospel Library

Other Resources about the Bible

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 66 .

M. Russell Ballard, “ The Miracle of the Holy Bible ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2007, 80.

See Guide to the Scriptures, “ Joseph Smith Translation (JST ),” Gospel Library.

M. Russell Ballard, “ The Miracle of the Holy Bible ,” 81.
