Birth of Jesus Christ
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/birth-of-jesus-christ-study-guide?lang=eng

“Birth of Jesus Christ,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Birth of Jesus Christ

“For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given”

Celebrating the birth of Jesus every Christmas season reminds us how important the story of the Nativity really is. While we don’t know much about the circumstances of Jesus’s birth, we know about the miraculous signs and wonders that were given and the people who bore witness that the Son of God had come to earth. Your gratitude and love for Jesus Christ will increase as you seek to learn about this sacred event.

Why Is the Birth of Jesus Christ So Significant?

As prophesied by ancient prophets, Jesus Christ was born in the meridian of time at Bethlehem, near Jerusalem. Jesus was the Only Begotten Son of Heavenly Father. His mother was Mary, who was espoused to Joseph. Miraculous signs and wonders accompanied His birth, witnessing that the long-promised Messiah had come to earth to save God’s children and make eternal life possible.

Topic overview: Jesus Christ

Related gospel study guides: Premortal Life , Jesus Christ , Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ

Section 1

Learning about Jesus Christ’s Birth through Ancient Prophecies

Every prophet since Adam’s day has testified of Jesus Christ and looked forward with great anticipation to the time when the Messiah would come and make salvation and eternal life possible for all mankind. “Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, even in the flesh; and his soul rejoiced” ( Moses 7:47 ). Isaiah prophesied, “For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given” ( Isaiah 9:6 ). Nephi saw a vision of Mary and the birth of the promised Messiah (see 1 Nephi 11:13–23 ). Abinadi testified, “God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people” ( Mosiah 15:1 ). When you study the prophecies and teachings about His birth, you can start to see just how essential it was for God the Father to send His Son Jesus Christ to earth.

Things to think about

Prophets testified that great signs and wonders would signal the birth of Jesus Christ to the people of the Book of Mormon. Read Helaman 14:1–9 and 3 Nephi 1:4–22 . Why did so many people refuse to believe the message of the prophets? What evidence do you have that Jesus Christ lives today and is reaching out in love to all God’s children?

Activity for learning with others

Watch the video “ Why We Need a Savior ” (2:15). Talk together about the question “What would life be like without a Savior?” You might also discuss why the message of Jesus’s birth should continue to bring great joy and peace to the world.

Learn more

Isaiah 7:14 ; Micah 5:2 ; Mosiah 3:5–8 ; 13:33–34 ; Alma 5:48

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Prophetic Announcements of Christ’s Birth ” (First Presidency Christmas devotional, Dec. 4, 2016), Gospel Library

Section 2

Witnesses Testified That the Savior Was Born

Because the birth of Jesus Christ was one of the most important events in history, God prepared many witnesses to testify of it, both before and after it happened. Some of these witnesses are the angel Gabriel ( Luke 1:26–33 ), Mary ( Luke 1:46–49 ), Mary’s cousin Elisabeth ( Luke 1:41–45 ), the shepherds ( Luke 2:16–17 ), Simeon ( Luke 2:25–33 ), Anna ( Luke 2:36–38 ), and the Wise Men from the east ( Matthew 2:1–2, 9–11 ).

Things to think about

Read President Russell M. Nelson’s 2020 Christmas message, “ Divine Gifts ,” looking for some of the meaningful symbols associated with the birth of Jesus Christ. What can these symbols teach you about Jesus Christ’s mortal mission?

Activity for learning with others

Watch The Christ Child (17:56) together. Then discuss the question “How do we feel about the birth of Jesus Christ when we consider the role of that significant event in God’s plan for our salvation?” If you are learning with children, invite them to draw their favorite scene from the film. Encourage them to share their thoughts about the birth of Jesus Christ.

Learn more

Matthew 2:1–11 ; Luke 2:1–20

Dieter  F. Uchtdorf, “ Seeing Christmas through New Eyes ” (First Presidency Christmas devotional, Dec 5, 2010), Gospel Library

Bonnie  L. Oscarson, “ Christmas Is Christlike Love ” (First Presidency Christmas devotional, Dec. 7, 2014), Gospel Library; video available at ChurchofJesusChrist.org/media

Annual First Presidency Christmas devotionals, 2010 to Present

Section 3

Studying Jesus’s Birth Can Draw Us Closer to Him

President Ezra Taft Benson explained: “The testimonies of appointed witnesses leave no question as to the paternity of Jesus Christ. God was the Father of His fleshly tabernacle, and Mary, a mortal woman, was His mother. … He was not the son of Joseph, nor was He begotten by the Holy Ghost. He is the Son of the Eternal Father!”

Jesus Christ is called the Only Begotten Son because He was the only Son of the Father born in the flesh (see 1 Nephi 11:13–22 ). He was sent here to do the will of His Father—to atone for the sins of all mankind (see John 3:16–17 ).

Things to think about

God’s plan to save His children required an “infinite and eternal sacrifice” that no animal or human could fulfill. It had to be the sacrifice of the Son of God. (See Alma 34:9–14 .) What do we know about the nature of Jesus Christ’s birth that made it possible for Him to carry out the “infinite and eternal sacrifice” needed in God’s plan? Heavenly Father has not revealed the process by which Jesus became His Only Begotten Son on earth; we know only what has been shared in scripture—for instance, Matthew 1:18–25 ; Luke 1:26–35 ; Mosiah 15:1–3 ; and Alma 7:9–10 .

In his talk “ The Wondrous and True Story of Christmas ,” President Gordon B. Hinckley said: “There would be no Christmas if there had not been Easter. The babe Jesus of Bethlehem would be but another baby without the redeeming Christ of Gethsemane and Calvary, and the triumphant fact of the Resurrection. … I wish for each of you a time, perhaps only an hour, spent in silent meditation and quiet reflection on the wonder and the majesty of this, the Son of God.” Why is it important to associate the event at Bethlehem with those at Gethsemane and Calvary?

Activity for learning with others

Many cultures celebrate Christ’s birth with the tradition of giving gifts. Review some of the gifts President Russell M. Nelson highlights in his talk “ Four Gifts That Jesus Christ Offers to You .” Ask, “What are some gifts from Jesus Christ that have made a difference in your life?”

Learn more

2 Nephi 25:12 ; Alma 5:48 ; 9:26 ; Doctrine and Covenants 93:11

“ Jesus Christ Is the Only Begotten Son of God ,” Liahona , Dec. 2010, 14–15

“ To This End Was I Born ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“ Glad Tidings of Great Joy: The Birth of Jesus Christ ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“ The Birth of Jesus Christ: ‘Good Tidings of Great Joy’ ” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Fielding Smith (2013), 311–18

Other Resources about the Birth of Jesus Christ

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ Divine Gifts ” (First Presidency Christmas devotional, Dec. 6, 2020), Gospel Library.

Ezra Taft Benson, “ Five Marks of the Divinity of Jesus Christ ,” Ensign , Dec. 2001, 10–11.

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ The Wondrous and True Story of Christmas ,” Ensign , Dec. 2000, 5.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Four Gifts That Jesus Christ Offers to You ” (First Presidency Christmas devotional, Dec. 2, 2018), Gospel Library.
