Bishop
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/bishop?lang=eng

“Bishop,” Topics and Questions (2023)

“,” Topics and Questions

Overview

Bishop

Overview

A bishop is a man who has been ordained and set apart as the presiding high priest for a ward, or congregation. He has overall responsibility for ministering the temporal and spiritual affairs of the congregation.

Scriptures

Scripture References

1 Timothy 3:1–7

Titus 1:7

Doctrine and Covenants 72

Doctrine and Covenants 84:112

Doctrine and Covenants 107:68–76

Scripture Study Resources

Bible Dictionary, “ Bishop ”

Topical Guide, “ Bishop ”

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Bishop ”

Index to the Triple Combination, “ Bishop ,” “ Bishopric ,” “ Pastor ”

Messages from Church Leaders

“Bishop, Help!”

President Dallin H. Oaks

The Bishop and His Counselors

President Boyd K. Packer

Additional Messages

Videos

“The Office of Bishop”

“Training for My Calling: Bishop”

“Counseling with the Bishop”

Learning Resources

General Resources

“ A Bishop unto the Church ,” Church History

“ Bishop, See Yourself in the Work ,” Hastening the Work of Salvation

“ How the Church Is Organized ,” Organization

“ Bishop’s Responsibilities for Young Single Adults ,” Serving Young Single Adults

“ Caring for the Poor and Needy ,” ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“ Bishopric ,” Aaronic Priesthood Callings

Church Magazines

“ My Dad the Bishop ,” Friend, March 2017

“ Questions & Answers: How can I become comfortable enough to talk to my bishop about issues or concerns? ” New Era, April 2015

Heidi S. Swinton, “ You Found Me, Bishop! ” Friend, January 2014

Bonnie Sprinkel, “ A Friend in the Bishop ,” Ensign, June 2012

Joseph Staples, “ Supporting Your Bishop ,” Ensign June 2007

Michael B. Wixom, “ Lesson for a Busy Bishop ,” Ensign, February 2006

In the News

“ Bishop ,” Newsroom

“ Presiding Bishopric ,” Newsroom

Stories

Called to Serve

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland

Redemption

Elder LeGrand R. Curtis Jr.

Willing and Worthy to Serve

President Thomas S. Monson

Bring Him Home

President Thomas S. Monson

The Bishop and His Counselors

Elder Boyd K. Packer

Teaching Resources

Stories and Activities for Teaching Children

“ Bishop ,” Lesson Helps for Teaching Children

Media

Images

Bishop, Media Library

The Bishop, Media Library
