Book of Mormon
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/book-of-mormon?lang=eng

“Book of Mormon,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon is another witness of Jesus Christ and confirms the truths found in the Holy Bible. Far from undermining the Bible, the Book of Mormon supports its testimony of Jesus Christ. One passage says that the Book of Mormon “shall establish the truth” of the Bible “and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father , and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved.” 1

In its more than 6,000 verses, the Book of Mormon refers to Jesus Christ almost 4,000 times and by 100 different names: “Jehovah,” “Immanuel,” “Holy Messiah,” “Lamb of God,” “Redeemer of Israel,” and so on.

Both volumes of scripture are a compilation of teachings as recorded by ancient prophets . While the Bible details events in the Eastern Hemisphere, the Book of Mormon documents the lives of the inhabitants of the ancient Americas.

The book was written by many ancient prophets by the spirit of prophecy and revelation . “Their words, written on gold plates , were quoted and abridged by a prophet-historian named Mormon. …

“The crowning event recorded in the Book of Mormon is the personal ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ among the Nephites soon after His resurrection . It puts forth the doctrines of the gospel , outlines the plan of salvation , and tells men what they must do to gain peace in this life and eternal salvation in the life to come. …

“In due course the plates were delivered to Joseph Smith , who translated them by the gift and power of God. The record is now published in many languages as a new and additional witness that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God and that all who will come unto Him and obey the laws and ordinances of His gospel may be saved. …

“We invite all men everywhere to read the Book of Mormon, to ponder in their hearts the message it contains, and then to ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ if the book is true. Those who pursue this course and ask in faith will gain a testimony of its truth and divinity by the power of the Holy Ghost . 2

“Those who gain this divine witness from the Holy Spirit will also come to know by the same power that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world, that Joseph Smith is His revelator and prophet in these last days, and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the Lord’s kingdom once again established on the earth, preparatory to the Second Coming of the Messiah.” 3

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Gospel study guide

Resources for children

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

1 Nephi 13:40 .

See Moroni 10:3–5 .

Introduction of the Book of Mormon .
