Book of Mormon
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/book-of-mormon-study-guide?lang=eng

“Book of Mormon,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Book of Mormon

Another Testament of Jesus Christ

Ancient prophets wrote the Book of Mormon for people in our day. As companion scripture with the Bible, the Book of Mormon testifies of Jesus Christ. Those who sincerely read and study the book will feel the Holy Ghost and find answers to many of life’s most important questions. By reading the Book of Mormon, people can learn for themselves that God lives, that He loves them, and that the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to the earth.

Modern prophets have frequently invited Church members to study the Book of Mormon regularly. For example, President Russell M. Nelson declared: “I promise that as you prayerfully study the Book of Mormon every day, you will make better decisions—every day. I promise that as you ponder what you study, the windows of heaven will open, and you will receive answers to your own questions and direction for your own life. I promise that as you daily immerse yourself in the Book of Mormon, you can be immunized against the evils of the day.”

What Is the Book of Mormon?

The Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ is a book of holy scripture. It contains the writings of ancient prophets who lived in the Western Hemisphere. As the Prophet of the Restoration, Joseph Smith translated the Book of Mormon by the gift and power of God (see Doctrine and Covenants 135:3 ). Alongside the Bible, the Book of Mormon testifies of Jesus Christ and contains the fulness of the gospel (see Ezekiel 37:15–17 ; Doctrine and Covenants 20:8–9 ). The Book of Mormon also serves as evidence of Joseph Smith’s prophetic calling and the Restoration of the gospel.

Topic overview: Book of Mormon

Related gospel study guides: Scriptures , Bible , Joseph Smith , Restoration of the Gospel

Section 1

The Book of Mormon Testifies That Jesus Christ Is the Redeemer of the World

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints consider the Bible to be holy scripture. Both the Old Testament and the New Testament are witnesses of Jesus Christ and of His work to bring about the salvation of God’s children. The Book of Mormon was written by prophets of God in the Americas and stands as another testament of Jesus Christ. The Book of Mormon includes “the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ” and confirms to the world that accounts of Jesus Christ and His prophets as found in the Bible are true (see Doctrine and Covenants 20:8–12 ). Together with the Bible, the Book of Mormon helps people have a clearer understanding of God’s plan and prepares them to follow Jesus Christ (see Ezekiel 37:15–17 ; 2 Nephi 3:12 ).

The Book of Mormon is a great blessing to God’s people today. It contains the words of Jesus Christ (see 2 Nephi 33:10 ). President Russell M. Nelson explained:

“[The Book of Mormon] contains the answers to life’s most compelling questions. It teaches the doctrine of Christ. It expands and clarifies many of the ‘plain and precious’ [see 1 Nephi 13:29–33 ] truths that were lost through centuries of time and numerous translations of the Bible.

“The Book of Mormon provides the fullest and most authoritative understanding of the Atonement of Jesus Christ to be found anywhere. … The full power of the gospel of Jesus Christ is contained in the Book of Mormon. Period.”

Things to think about

Joseph Smith taught that the Book of Mormon is “the keystone of our religion” (see Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 64 ). In architecture, a keystone is a wedge-shaped stone in the center of an arch, which keeps the other stones in place and prevents the arch from collapsing. Like an architectural keystone, the Book of Mormon is integral to our belief in Jesus Christ and His restored gospel. How does your testimony of the Book of Mormon influence your testimony of other aspects of the gospel?

Activity for learning with others

The central message of the Book of Mormon is that Jesus is the Christ. Invite members of your group to read the title page of the Book of Mormon , paying special attention to the second paragraph. How does the title page emphasize the importance of the Book of Mormon? The following scriptures may also be helpful: 1 Nephi 6:4 ; Jacob 1:7 ; Omni 1:26 ; 3 Nephi 11:13–17 ; Moroni 10:32–33 . Why is it important to help others understand that the purpose of the Book of Mormon is to testify that Jesus is the Christ?

Learn more

2 Nephi 29:1–13 ; 33:10–15 ; Doctrine and Covenants 42:12 ; Joseph Smith—History 1:34 ; Articles of Faith 1:8

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Book of Mormon: What Would Your Life Be Like without It? ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 60–63

“ Chapter 9: The Book of Mormon—Keystone of Our Religion ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 125–34

Section 2

The Coming Forth of the Book of Mormon Was Miraculous

The Book of Mormon was brought forth by the gift and power of God. The book was originally recorded by ancient American prophets on metal plates. For centuries, they lay buried near Joseph Smith’s home in upstate New York in the United States, until a heavenly messenger, Moroni, showed Joseph Smith where to find them. An instrument for translating the record, the Urim and Thummim, was also stored with the plates, along with other ancient artifacts (see Joseph Smith—History 1:30–35 ).

Although Joseph Smith was only 23 years old and had little formal education, he translated the Book of Mormon into English at a rate of about eight pages per day. He had no understanding of ancient languages, and he did not use any notes. He completed the entire translation of the book in about 85 days. When people asked how he was able to translate, Joseph said simply that it was done “by the gift and power of God” ( title page of the Book of Mormon ; see also Russell M. Nelson, “ A Treasured Testament ,” Ensign , July 1993).

The Book of Mormon was published in English just a few days before the organization of the Church in 1830 (see Church History Topics, “ Printing and Publishing the Book of Mormon ,” Gospel Library). Today, the Book of Mormon has been translated into more than 100 languages and is used throughout the world.

Things to think about

Joseph Smith was commanded to guard the plates carefully. During the translation process, few people actually saw the plates. However, Joseph Smith was told to show the plates to a few of his close associates. These people became formally known as the “Three Witnesses” and the “Eight Witnesses.” You can read their testimonies in “ The Testimony of Three Witnesses ” and “ The Testimony of Eight Witnesses .” Why is it important to help others be aware of the experiences of the Three Witnesses and the Eight Witnesses? What might you do to share your own witness of the Book of Mormon with others?

Activity for learning with others

Though many people have wondered what the Book of Mormon translation process was like, Joseph Smith gave little specific information about it other than to say that it was translated “by the gift and power of God” ( introduction to the Book of Mormon ; Doctrine and Covenants 135:3 ). Invite your group members to read “ Book of Mormon Translation ” in Church History Topics (Gospel Library). Ask them what insights they gained from the reading. Why do you think Joseph Smith emphasized “the gift and power of God” when discussing the translation of the Book of Mormon?

Learn more

Isaiah 29:11–14, 18–19 ; Joseph Smith—History 1:30–35, 42–54

Saints: The Story of the Church of Jesus Christ in the Latter Days , vol. 1, The Standard of Truth, 1815–1846 (2018), 21–30 , 39–64

Russell M. Nelson, “ A Treasured Testament ,” Ensign , July 1993

“ Days of Harmony ” (video), Gospel Library

Section 3

You Can Learn for Yourself That the Book of Mormon Is True

Becoming a disciple of Jesus Christ is a lifelong process. Each of us is at a different place on the spiritual path back to Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ. But wherever you are on that path, the Book of Mormon can help you draw closer to Them. The word of God is full of converting power (see Alma 5:7 ; 31:5 ). The Book of Mormon can help you avoid worldly deception and lead you on the path to spiritual safety (see 1 Nephi 15:24 ; Helaman 3:29–30 ).

Because of the importance of the Book of Mormon, the Lord’s servants have emphasized that all members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints should seek to know for themselves that the Book of Mormon is true. The introduction to the Book of Mormon states: “We invite all men everywhere to read the Book of Mormon, to ponder in their hearts the message it contains, and then to ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ if the book is true. Those who pursue this course and ask in faith will gain a testimony of its truth and divinity by the power of the Holy Ghost. (See Moroni 10:3–5 .)”

Things to think about

Read the following statement by Elder Jeffrey R. Holland: “I testify that one cannot come to full faith in this latter-day work—and thereby find the fullest measure of peace and comfort in these, our times—until he or she embraces the divinity of the Book of Mormon and the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom it testifies.” How has the Book of Mormon influenced your testimony of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?

Activity for learning with others

The Book of Mormon is a divinely prepared conversion tool that has the power to change minds, hearts, and lives as we align ourselves with Jesus Christ and His teachings. Read the following statement by President Ezra Taft Benson with members of your group:

“The Book of Mormon is the instrument that God designed to ‘sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out [His] elect.’ ( Moses 7:62 .) This sacred volume of scripture needs to become more central in our preaching, our teaching, and our missionary work. …

“I challenge all of us to prayerfully consider steps that we can personally take to bring this new witness for Christ more fully into our own lives and into a world that so desperately needs it.”

What are some ways we can assist the Lord in His work by flooding the earth with the Book of Mormon?

Learn more

2 Nephi 25:17–18 ; Ether 4:11 ; Doctrine and Covenants 20:8–15

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Safety for the Soul ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2009, 88–90

Ronald A. Rasband, “ This Day ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 25–27

Michael T. Ringwood, “ You Can Know for Yourself ,” Ensign , Feb. 2017, 66–69

Other Resources about the Book of Mormon

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

See Russell M. Nelson, “ A Testimony of the Book of Mormon ,” Ensign , Nov. 1999, 70.

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Book of Mormon: What Would Your Life Be Like without It? ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 62–63.

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Book of Mormon: What Would Your Life Be Like without It? ,” 62.

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Safety for the Soul ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2009, 89.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 143–44 .
