Caring for Those in Need
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/caring-for-those-in-need-study-guide?lang=eng

“Caring for Those in Need,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Caring for Those in Need

We can be God’s hands to help others

Have you ever thought about all the difficulties and suffering of the people around you and wondered, “I’m just one person; what good can I do?” You may be just one person, but you can still make a big contribution by doing small and simple things to help those in need. And a great deal of good is accomplished every day when many people help where and how they can.

You can care for those in need around you as you share your time and talents and “impart of your substance to the poor, … according to that which [you have], such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, [and] visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally” ( Mosiah 4:26 ).

What Is Caring for Those in Need?

Caring for those in need means helping others temporally, spiritually, and emotionally. It includes “serving and ministering to individuals, families, and communities; sharing resources … with those in need; [and] helping others become self-reliant.” Caring for physical needs can mean meeting immediate needs, but it can also mean helping people become more self-reliant so they can meet their own needs in the future. Caring for emotional and spiritual needs includes listening, empathizing, and helping others recognize that they are loved by Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ. As members of the Church of Jesus Christ, we covenant to minister to and help care for those around us.

Related gospel study guides: Charity , Fasting

Section 1

God Commands Us to Love and Serve Others

God loves all His children, and He wants to bless them. Often, the way God blesses His children is through the service we give to others. In fact, one of God’s two great commandments is to love our neighbor as ourselves (see Mark 12:28–34 ). One of the ways we follow this commandment is to “serve one another … [and] succor those that stand in need of … succor” ( Mosiah 4:15–16 ).

In the temples of the Lord, we covenant to sacrifice and consecrate all that we have to Him. One way we do that is by giving generously of our time and efforts to help the people around us. As we do, we can form a deeper relationship with our Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and become more like Them.

Service isn’t always convenient or easy. But we can bring comfort and happiness to others as we love and serve them. And by serving others we can experience real joy and a sense of purpose in doing something truly worthwhile.

Things to think about

If you want to help those in need but you aren’t sure how, Elder David A. Bednar’s message “ In the Path of Their Duty ” could help. Elder Bednar taught: “Discerning brothers and sisters … look for and sit next to people who are alone in Church meetings and in a variety of other settings. They consistently strive to ‘comfort those that stand in need of comfort’ [ Mosiah 18:9 ], without expectations of acknowledgment or praise.” You could review his message and look for small and simple ways to serve someone in need. Write down your ideas, and act on impressions you receive.

The Prophet Joseph Smith counseled: “A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race.” Why do you think a person filled with the love of God will want to bless all humankind? In what ways can you share the love of God with others? How can your acts of love and kindness help change you as well?

Activities for learning with others

Read Luke 10:25–37 together. You could also watch the video “ Parable of the Good Samaritan ” (4:55). If you’re learning with children, they might enjoy acting out the parable. Then you could talk about how the Samaritan obeyed the commandment to love his neighbor. You could also discuss the actions of the priest and the Levite. What are some reasons we sometimes don’t serve those in need? How can we overcome those obstacles? You might share with each other some experiences when you served someone in need—or when someone served you—and how you felt. You could each set a goal to serve someone every day for a week and then report on your experiences.

Read Mosiah 2:17 , and talk about how you are serving God when you serve others. You could then watch the video “ Day of Service ” (5:08). How were the people in the video blessed as they served? How was the community blessed? Consider how you might participate as a group in a day of service. You could explore JustServe.org for ideas.

Learn more

Deuteronomy 15:11 ; Isaiah 1:17 ; Matthew 20:26–27 ; 22:36–40 ; Jacob 2:17–19

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Second Great Commandment ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2019, 96–100

General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , chapters 21–22 , Gospel Library

Section 2

We Follow Jesus Christ’s Example When We Care for Those in Need

Jesus Christ is our great example of serving and helping others; He truly “went about doing good” ( Acts 10:38 ). As members of His Church, we are invited to help care for those around us (see Mosiah 18:8–10 ).

As followers of Christ, we strive to see others as the Savior sees them—as having infinite worth and divine potential. We help them with temporal, spiritual, and emotional needs. The Savior fed the hungry and consoled those who were hurting (see, for example, Matthew 14:14–21 ; Luke 7:11–15 ). We can do the same. For example, that could mean bringing food to a neighbor in need, sitting and listening to a friend who has lost a loved one, or helping care for someone who is ill. We minister to others without any expectation of receiving something in return.

Things to think about

In the April 2010 general conference, President Dieter F. Uchtdorf taught, “As we emulate [Jesus Christ’s] perfect example, our hands can become His hands; our eyes, His eyes; our heart, His heart.” What does it mean for your hands, eyes, and heart to be the Savior’s hands, eyes, and heart? How does this way of thinking affect the way you serve others? Read 1 John 3:17–19 , and ponder what it teaches about caring for those in need. How do these verses inspire you to follow the example of Jesus Christ as you serve those around you? You could think of someone who needs help or encouragement and do an anonymous act of service for that person. Or you might serve someone by listening to his or her worries or by being a true friend. You could then record your thoughts about the experience.

You could read or sing the words to a hymn about helping those in need, such as “ Lord, I Would Follow Thee ” or “ Because I Have Been Given Much .” As you think about the words of the song, consider how you are following the Savior when you serve others. What blessings have you received that you could share to lift those around you the way He did?

Activity for learning with others

Elder Gerrit W. Gong taught: “We become more like Jesus Christ when we do ‘unto … the least of these’ as we would unto Him [see Matthew 25:35–40 ], when we love our neighbor as ourselves [see Mark 12:31 ], when we ‘love one another; as I have loved you’ [ John 13:34 ], and when ‘whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister’ [ Matthew 20:26 ].”

“As followers of Jesus Christ, we seek to minister to others as He would because lives are waiting to change.”

You could talk about some of the ways Jesus Christ served others (see Matthew 14:13–21 ; Mark 2:1–12 ; Luke 17:11–19 ; John 9:1–7 ; 11:1–44 ). You could also look for pictures of some of these accounts in the Gospel Art Book or the “ Videos and Images ” collection in Gospel Library. Share with each other what impresses you about the way the Savior cared for those in need. You might then choose one thing about the Savior’s way of serving that you would like to follow. Consider how your actions could truly bless those whose “lives are waiting to change.”

Learn more

Psalm 35:10 ; Luke 6:27–38 ; Acts 20:35 ; Doctrine and Covenants 42:30–31 ; 52:40

W. Christopher Waddell, “ Just as He Did ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 19–21

Camille N. Johnson, “ Jesus Christ Is Relief ,” Liahona , May 2023, 81–83

Jean B. Bingham, “ Ministering as the Savior Does ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2018, 104–7

Section 3

We Care for Others as We Serve in Church Callings

During His mortal ministry, Jesus Christ gave His disciples important responsibilities to help accomplish His Father’s work (see, for example, Luke 10:1–9 ). The Lord also invites us to participate in God’s work of salvation and exaltation today. These opportunities to serve are known as callings.

Callings are responsibilities from the Lord to His children that give them the opportunity to serve in His Church and draw closer to Him and to other members. These callings are extended through Church leaders, who seek inspiration from the Lord before extending an invitation to serve. Every Church calling and assignment is important in helping accomplish God’s work and preparing for the Savior’s Second Coming.

Things to think about

Think about callings or responsibilities you have had in the Church as you read John 15:16 . Then read this thought by President Henry B. Eyring: “The Lord knows you. He knows whom He would have serve in every position in His Church. He chose you.” Think about the “fruit” you have seen from serving in your callings or assignments. Why might the Lord have chosen you for your current calling? What can you do in your calling so that your service might have a lasting impact on others and “your fruit should remain”?

Activity for learning with others

You could trace your feet a few times to make simple footsteps and then write inside each footstep one way we can come closer to Christ as we serve in our Church callings and assignments. You could then read this thought by President Dieter F. Uchtdorf together: “If we approach our callings as opportunities to serve God and minister to others with faith and humility, every act of service will be a step on the path of discipleship.” You might then share with each other what you wrote. Ponder what you could do to serve with more faith and humility in your callings. Record impressions that come, and then act on them.

Learn more

Joshua 1:1–9 ; Matthew 25:23 ; 1 Corinthians 12:13–18 ; Doctrine and Covenants 84:88 ; Articles of Faith 1:5

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ Lift Where You Stand ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2008, 53–56

Carl B. Cook, “ Serve ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2016, 110–12

Other Resources about Caring for Those in Need

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders: Welfare , Charity , Ministering , Service

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 1.2.2 , Gospel Library.

David A. Bednar, “ In the Path of Their Duty ,” Liahona , Nov. 2023, 7.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 426 .

One way we can help meet temporal needs is by donating fast offerings .

All adult Church members and youth turning 14 or older can serve as someone else’s ministering brother or sister. This way, each member can help care for and fellowship but is also being cared for and fellowshipped themselves. See chapter 21 of the General Handbook for more information.

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ You Are My Hands ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2010, 68.

“ Lord, I Would Follow Thee ,” Hymns , no. 220.

“ Because I Have Been Given Much ,” Hymns , no. 219.

Gerrit W. Gong, “ Ministering ,” Liahona , May 2023, 18–19, 16.

See General Handbook , 30.0 .

See General Handbook , 1.2 .

Henry B. Eyring, “ Rise to Your Call ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2002, 76.

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ The Greatest among You ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2017, 80.
