Charity
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/charity-study-guide?lang=eng

“Charity,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Charity

Having the pure love of Christ

We all get frustrated or upset every now and then—maybe even often. Perhaps we don’t see eye to eye with neighbors or coworkers. Or at times we might be impatient with our children or spouse. We might find ourselves being critical and judging others. Of course, no one is perfect, and it’s normal to feel this way sometimes. But have you ever wondered how you can be more loving and patient toward those around you?

The answer is simple: your heart can be softened through charity, which is a gift from God. Developing charity is becoming like Jesus Christ, and that is a lifelong pursuit. But your Heavenly Father and your Savior, Jesus Christ, will help you as you faithfully seek to become more like Them.

What Is Charity?

Charity is the pure love of Jesus Christ (see Moroni 7:47 ). It is the highest and strongest form of love. Charity motivates us to serve God and others with all our heart, might, mind, and strength (see Doctrine and Covenants 59:5 ).

Topic overview: Charity

Related gospel study guides: Jesus Christ , Faith , Hope , Gifts of the Spirit

Section 1

Charity Is the Pure Love of Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ for All People

Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ love us perfectly. The prophet Mormon taught that “charity is the pure love of Christ” ( Moroni 7:47 ). During His life, Jesus Christ showed love and compassion toward the hungry, the sinner, the afflicted, and the sick. He ministered to the poor and to the rich, to friends and to strangers. He even forgave His accusers and those who crucified Him (see Luke 23:34 ). Jesus Christ was the perfect example of perfect love.

Things to think about

Jesus Christ’s perfect love influenced each one of His actions. Consider these examples: Matthew 26:39 ; Luke 7:22 ; 1 Nephi 19:9 . How does each of these passages show Christ’s love for us? You might compare these examples of the Savior’s love with Paul’s description of charity in 1 Corinthians 13 . How has the Savior shown this kind of love toward you?

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, “Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity.” Consider writing in your journal the words I know God loves me because … Throughout the week, write down ways you would complete this sentence. You could read or listen to a song such as “ God Is Love ” or “ My Heavenly Father Loves Me ” for ideas.

Activities for learning together

Consider this teaching by Elder Jeffrey R. Holland: “The first great commandment of all eternity is to love God with all of our heart, might, mind, and strength—that’s the first great commandment. But the first great truth of all eternity is that God loves us with all of His heart, might, mind, and strength.” Discuss how knowing of God’s great love for you could change how you feel, think, and act.

Watching the video “ Charity: An Example of the Believers ” (4:50) could inspire a discussion about how Christlike love changes lives. How did the young women in this video show Christlike love to the new cheerleader? How did this love affect her? How did it affect the other young women? Think of the people around you who might need to feel the Savior’s love. Talk about ways you could share Christ’s love with one or two of them.

Learn more

Luke 10:30–37 ; 1 John 3:16–18 ; 4:7–11, 18–19

Alan T. Phillips, “ God Knows and Loves You ,” Liahona , Nov. 2023, 49–52

Michael T. Ringwood, “ For God So Loved Us ,” Liahona , May 2022, 88–90

Susan H. Porter, “ God’s Love: The Most Joyous to the Soul ,” Liahona , Nov. 2021, 33–35

Section 2

Charity Is the Greatest Virtue That Followers of Jesus Christ Can Obtain

Charity is not something we do or something we give away. It is a state of our heart and a way to live. It is who we become and what we feel, and it leads us to take loving action (see Moroni 7:45–47 ).

Without charity, we are nothing; with it, we have everything (see Ether 12:34 ; Moroni 7:44 ). All other things pass away, but charity endures forever and never fails (see Moroni 7:46–47 ). So how do we obtain this gift? The prophet Mormon said, “Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, … that when [Jesus Christ] shall appear we shall be like him” ( Moroni 7:48 ).

We learn to practice charity in our relationships—in our families, in our church congregations, in our communities, and with everyone we meet. As we strive to accept others for who they are and to see them as our Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ do, we can begin to love people as They do.

Things to think about

Read 1 Corinthians 13:1–7 , imagining yourself in these verses. Then read verse 8 . What does it mean to you that “charity never faileth”? Consider if there are any of the attributes listed in verses 4–7 that you could work on to help you be a better example of charity.

While charity is a gift from God, like any gift, we have to receive it. What do you learn from Moroni 7:48 ; 8:26 about how to receive the gift of charity?

President Russell M. Nelson taught these important truths about charity: “Charity is the antidote to contention. Charity is the spiritual gift that helps us to cast off the natural man, who is selfish, defensive, prideful, and jealous. Charity is the principal characteristic of a true follower of Jesus Christ. Charity defines a peacemaker.” As you ponder President Nelson’s words, what does the Spirit inspire you to do? Consider putting President Nelson’s statement somewhere you will see it often as a reminder to show charity for others.

Activities for learning with others

How do you identify a follower of Jesus Christ? The Savior Himself taught, “By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another” ( John 13:35 ). As a group, think about people you admire who are true examples of charity. How have you seen them show the pure love of Christ? Consider sending a text or writing a note to one of these people and sharing what you admire about him or her.

Talk about some important choices you make every day. Then read “ Love God, Love Your Neighbor ” in For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices ([2022], 10–15). Discuss how the gift of charity could be a guide as you make each of those choices.

Consider this counsel by President Dieter F. Uchtdorf: “Whatever problems [you or] your family is facing, whatever you must do to solve them, the beginning and the end of the solution is charity, the pure love of Christ.” Work together to make a list of some problems or challenges that individuals or families face today, such as contention or envy. Then you could read Moroni 7:45 and talk about how the attributes of charity described in this verse could help solve the problems on your list. You could then make a simple plan to apply charity to help resolve one of the problems. Involve God in your plan, and seek help from others as appropriate.

Learn more

2 Nephi 26:30 ; Doctrine and Covenants 121:45–46

Russell M. Nelson, “ Peacemakers Needed ,” Liahona , May 2023, 98–101

Ulisses Soares, “ Followers of the Prince of Peace ,” Liahona , May 2023, 85–87

J. Anette Dennis, “ His Yoke Is Easy and His Burden Is Light ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 80–82

Marvin J. Ashton, “ The Tongue Can Be a Sharp Sword ,” Ensign , May 1992, 18–20

“ Charity, the Pure Love of Christ ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 423–33

Other Resources about Charity

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 426 .

Hymns , no. 87 .

Children’s Songbook , 228 .

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Tomorrow the Lord Will Do Wonders among You ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2016, 127.

President Dallin H. Oaks taught that “the reason charity never fails and the reason charity is greater than even the most significant acts of goodness [that the Apostle Paul] cited [in 1 Corinthians 13 ] is that charity, ‘the pure love of Christ’ ( Moro. 7:47 ), is not an act but a condition or state of being. Charity is attained through a succession of acts that result in a conversion. Charity is something one becomes” (“ The Challenge to Become ,” Ensign , Nov. 2000, 34).

Russell M. Nelson, “ Peacemakers Needed ,” Liahona , May 2023, 100.

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ In Praise of Those Who Save ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2016, 80.
