Charity
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/charity?lang=eng

“Charity,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Charity

Charity is the pure love of Christ. It is the love that Christ has for the children of men and that the children of men should have for one another. It is the highest, noblest, and strongest kind of love and the most joyous to the soul. 1

Charity is “the pure love of Christ,” or “everlasting love.” 2 The prophet Mormon taught: “Charity suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and is not puffed up, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.” 3

Jesus Christ is the perfect example of charity. In His mortal ministry, He always “went about doing good,” teaching the gospel and showing tender compassion for the poor, afflicted, and distressed. 4 His crowning expression of charity was His infinite Atonement . He said, “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.” 5 This was the greatest act of long-suffering, kindness, and selflessness that we will ever know.

The Savior wants all people to receive His love and to share it with others. He declared to His disciples: “A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.” 6 In relationships with family members and others, followers of Christ look to the Savior as their example and strive to love as He loves, with unfailing compassion, patience, and mercy .

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Gospel Study Guide

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

See 1 Nephi 11:23 .

Moroni 7:47 ; 8:17 .

Moroni 7:45 ; see also 1 Corinthians 13:4–7 .

Matthew 4:23 ; Mark 6:6 ; Acts 10:38 .

John 15:13 .

John 13:34–35 .
