Children of God
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/children-of-god-study-guide?lang=eng

“Children of God,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Children of God

The defining characteristic of every person on earth

Imagine you are meeting someone for the first time and he or she says, “Tell me about yourself.” What would you say? It would depend on the setting, of course, but the facts you choose to share can say a lot about how you see yourself—and how you want others to see you.

There is one fact about you that is more important than all the others. And while you may not bring it up when introducing yourself, it is more fundamental to your identity than your name, your hometown, or your personal interests. It is the fact that you are a child of God. He is your Father. Just as you have parents on earth from whom you inherited physical traits, you are also “a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, [you have] a divine nature and destiny.” How can this fact affect the way you see yourself? How could it change your approach to life’s challenges and opportunities?

What Does It Mean to Be a Child of God?

All human beings are sons and daughters of a loving Father in Heaven. As a literal child of God, spiritually begotten in the premortal life, each person has a divine, eternal potential (see Romans 8:16–17 ).

Topic overview: Spirit Children of Heavenly Parents

Related gospel study guides: God the Father , Plan of Salvation , Premortal Life

Section 1

God Is Not Just Your Creator; He Is Your Father

Everyone has an earthly father, and none of those fathers are perfect. Still, no matter what our experiences with fathers and fatherhood on earth might be, we also have a Heavenly Father who is everything that a father ought to be—loving, supportive, wise, selfless, committed to your success. The most powerful and glorious Being in the universe loves you as His precious child. He understands you perfectly and knows exactly what you need to grow, progress, and find eternal joy. Titles such as “Supreme Being,” “Creator,” and “Almighty King” all certainly apply to Him. But, above all else, He wants you to know Him as “Father.”

Things to think about

Moses learned in a heavenly vision that he was a son of God. Read about his experience in Moses 1:1–11 . Also note in verses 12–18 how this knowledge helped Moses when Satan tried to tempt him. Ponder how remembering that you are a child of God can help you during times of temptation.

Elder Brian K. Taylor told a story about a young woman who said, “Knowing I am a child of God is the most powerful knowledge I possess!” Read about her in “ Am I a Child of God? ” to find out why she said that. Why did knowing God is her Father make such a big difference in her life? What difference can it make in your life?

Have you ever created some type of craft or work of art? Or maybe you’ve created something like a schedule, budget, or meal. Consider how your relationship with the thing you created is different from the relationship between a parent and a child. Think about this as you ponder these scriptures: Galatians 4:6–7 ; 1 John 3:2 . Why is it important to you to know that you are a daughter or son—not just a creation—of God?

Activity for learning with others

To teach about our potential as children of God, consider how you might illustrate that parents and their children share physical traits. Maybe you could show pictures of parents and their children and look for similarities. Then you could read some scriptures about Heavenly Father’s traits, such as these:

Psalm 116:5

Luke 6:35–36

1 John 4:7–8

Ether 3:12

What evidence of these traits do we see in each other? How can we develop them further and become more like our Father in Heaven?

Learn more

Galatians 4:6–7 ; Hebrews 12:9

Russell M. Nelson, “ Choices for Eternity ” (worldwide devotional for young adults, May 15, 2022), Gospel Library

Donald L. Hallstrom, “ I Am a Child of God ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2016, 26–28

Rosemary M. Wixom, “ Discovering the Divinity Within ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2015, 6–8

Section 2

Treat Everyone as a Child of God

It’s common to hear members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints call each other “brother” and “sister.” As President Henry B. Eyring explained, these words “are not just friendly greetings or terms of endearment for us. They are an expression of an eternal truth: God is the literal Father of all mankind; we are each part of His eternal family.” This simple truth has the power to transform the way we treat each other. We may be different in our thoughts, actions, and physical appearance, but those differences are much easier to appreciate and respect when we remember that, spiritually speaking, we are all family.

Things to think about

The Book of Mormon tells of two groups of people—the Nephites and the Lamanites—who were fierce enemies for many generations. But there were times when these groups overcame their hatred and treated each other like brothers and sisters. Read about these experiences in Mosiah 28:1–3 ; Alma 26:23–31 ; 27:20–24 ; 4 Nephi 1:1–3, 14–18 . As you read, ponder what you can do to help the Savior bring peace to God’s family.

People you meet probably won’t introduce themselves as a child of God, but you can think of them that way when you meet them. Try it! And whenever you’re tempted to think badly of someone, replace that thought with “This person is a child of God.” Notice how it affects the way you feel about people—and the way you treat them.

Activity for learning with others

Consider showing photos of people from a variety of races, cultures, and backgrounds. Talk about the many ways that people are similar to each other. Discuss why God wants us to always respect and treat others with kindness.

Learn more

Malachi 2:10 ; Acts 17:24–29 ; Doctrine and Covenants 18:10 ; 76:24

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Love Your Enemies ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2020, 26–29

Other Resources about Our Identity as Children of God

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

“ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library.

Brian K. Taylor, “ Am I a Child of God? ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2018, 12–13.

Henry B. Eyring, “ Gathering the Family of God ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2017, 20.
