Church Councils
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/church-councils?lang=eng

“Church Councils,” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Church Councils

The purpose of Church councils is to seek and receive divine revelation . Councils in the Church follow the pattern of the council in heaven . In Church councils we can gain inspiration to make decisions, better serve individuals and families, and plan and coordinate God’s work of salvation and exaltation. Councils in the Church give special emphasis to helping Church members receive ordinances and keep the associated covenants.

Church members are called, or chosen through revelation from God to Church leaders, to serve on councils. Through the many councils in the Church, men and women help direct the Lord’s work around the world. The General Handbook notes that “the diverse backgrounds, ages, experiences, and viewpoints of council members enrich the council.”

Councils help us seek the Lord’s will in unity and faith. They are found at all levels of the Church and include general, area, stake , ward, quorum , class, and other leadership councils. Council members seek to become united with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ in their desire and purpose. In the Church, councils are not governed by majority rule as is common in many other organizations. The council leader also does not make decisions on his or her own. Decisions made by the council leader are informed by the council’s discussion and confirmed by the Holy Ghost.

A leader guides the council’s discussions and encourages each person to share their insights. Council members should feel safe to share their opinion in a spirit of kindness and love. Leaders work to create an environment where every person is heard and every opinion valued. This is something quite rare in the world today.

As council members listen, humbly consider others’ feelings, and seek to know Heavenly Father’s will, there can be a spirit of inspiration and unity. For more information about Church councils, see General Handbook , chapter 4 .

Related Topics

Council in Heaven

Family Councils

Related Content

Messages from Church leaders

Notes

See General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 4.4.1 .

General Handbook , 4.4.3 .

See General Handbook , 4.4.4 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 88:122 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 107:27–31 .
