Covenants and Ordinances
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/covenant-study-guide?lang=eng

“Covenants and Ordinances,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Covenants and Ordinances

Essential covenants and ordinances help us along the path to exaltation and eternal life

With today’s technology, we can quickly find detailed instructions and maps to help us get to wherever we want to go. The restored gospel of Jesus Christ is our map and detailed instruction to find meaning in this life as well as eternal life in the world to come. When we choose to follow Christ and live the gospel, God offers us sacred covenants and ordinances of salvation and exaltation, which connect us to Him and direct us on the path leading to eternal life.

What Are Covenants and Ordinances?

Ordinances are sacred, formal acts or ceremonies performed by the authority of the priesthood. Often ordinances relate to specific covenants, or sacred promises between God and His children. When we make covenants and receive ordinances, we progress on our spiritual journey back to God. Ordinances that are essential for salvation and exaltation include baptism, confirmation and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, Melchizedek Priesthood ordination for men, the temple endowment, and temple sealing to a spouse. Children who die before age eight do not need ordinances in order to be saved in the celestial kingdom (see Doctrine and Covenants 137:10 ).

Topic overview: Covenant and Ordinances

Related gospel study guides: Baptism , Gift of the Holy Ghost , Melchizedek Priesthood , Endowment and Sealing Ordinances , Jesus Christ , Participating in Temple and Family History Work

Section 1

The Covenant Path Will Lead You to Eternal Life

If you imagine your life as a journey back to God, making covenants and receiving ordinances is like following guideposts along the path that leads to eternal life (see Doctrine and Covenants 14:7 ). These are key steps in your effort to come unto Jesus Christ, whose help you need to progress on the path (see 2 Nephi 9:41 ). In the Church, we sometimes refer to this as the “covenant path,” which is a metaphor for living the gospel of Jesus Christ. Viewing the gospel as a path highlights the importance of making and keeping covenants and receiving ordinances as we progress toward eternal life with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ.

Staying on the covenant path will provide you with safety, peace, and enduring joy. It will give you strength in difficult times. President Russell M. Nelson promised: “Now, to each member of the Church I say, keep on the covenant path. Your commitment to follow the Savior by making covenants with Him and then keeping those covenants will open the door to every spiritual blessing and privilege available to men, women, and children everywhere.”

Things to think about

The resurrected Savior invited the people gathered at the temple in Bountiful to come unto Him (see 3 Nephi 11:14–17 ). Watch the video “ Covenants and Ordinances ” (1:37), listening to what Elder David A. Bednar teaches about how covenants and ordinances help us come unto Jesus Christ. What blessings come to those who worthily make covenants with God and receive His ordinances?

The prophet Lehi recorded a dream in which he saw a path leading to the tree of life. Read 1 Nephi 8:19–24, 30 . What can we learn from this passage about the importance of staying on the covenant path? What efforts have you taken in your life to remain on the covenant path? How can repentance help you stay centered on God’s path?

Activities for learning with others

Through the gift of the Holy Ghost, covenant-makers can gain divine help to become covenant-keepers. Watch “ The Covenant Path ” (2:30). Talk about the ways to keep covenants as highlighted by Elder D. Todd Christofferson in this video. What are some of the blessings of pursuing the covenant path?

Consider having members of your group study the article “ Why Ordinances and Covenants Matter .” Invite group members to identify the important role the house of the Lord plays in our efforts to pursue and stay on the covenant path.

Learn more

2 Nephi 31:17–20 ; 33:9 ; Helaman 3:27–30 ; Doctrine and Covenants 84:20–21 ; Articles of Faith 1:3

General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 1.3.2 , 3.5.1 , 3.5.2 , Gospel Library

D. Todd Christofferson, “ Why the Covenant Path ,” Liahona , May 2021, 116–19

Randy D. Funk, “ Covenants, Ordinance and Blessings ,” Liahona , Sept. 2021, 30–35

“ Why Ordinances and Covenants Matter ,” ChurchofJesusChrist.org .

Section 2

God Invites You to Bind Yourself to Jesus Christ through Covenants

Making and keeping sacred covenants binds you to the Lord Jesus Christ (see Doctrine and Covenants 35:24 ). President Russell M. Nelson explained: “Entering into a covenant relationship with God binds us to Him in a way that makes everything about life easier. Please do not misunderstand me: I did not say that making covenants makes life easy . … But yoking yourself with the Savior means you have access to His strength and redeeming power.”

Everything in the gospel of Jesus Christ is designed to prepare you to follow Him and become more like Him. Elder David A. Bednar stated, “Covenants and ordinances are the building blocks that enable us to build our lives upon the ‘rock of our Redeemer’ [ Helaman 5:12 ] and His Atonement.” When you seek to endure to the end by keeping your covenants, you will enjoy the salvation and redemption offered by Jesus Christ (see Omni 1:26 ).

Things to think about

While the ordinances we receive are varied, they all have one thing in common—they help us draw closer to Jesus Christ and provide access to His power. Some priesthood ordinances in the Church help us draw closer to Jesus Christ but are not considered essential to salvation and eternal life (such as the naming and blessing of children, consecrating oil, or dedicating graves).

Other ordinances are required for our salvation and exaltation (baptism, confirmation and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, Melchizedek Priesthood ordination for men, the temple endowment, and temple sealing to a spouse). How can learning about these essential ordinances and the associated covenants help you measure your progress on the covenant path?

Activity for learning with others

The Old Testament prophet Abraham is an example of one who was faithful in making and keeping covenants with God. Watch the video “ Elder Nelson Talks about Covenants ” (4:45), listening for the blessings God promised to Abraham. Which of these promised blessings are available to members of the Church today? How do these covenant blessings help us better understand Heavenly Father’s loving plan for His children?

Learn more

1 Nephi 17:40 ; Alma 13:16 ; 3 Nephi 20:24–26 ; Doctrine and Covenants 43:9 ; 82:15

Russell M. Nelson, “ Overcome the World and Find Rest ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 95–98

David A. Bednar, “ But We Heeded Them Not ,” Liahona , May 2022, 14–16

David A. Bednar, “ Bound to the Savior through Covenants ,” For the Strength of Youth , Feb. 2022, 3–5

Dale G. Renlund, “ Accessing God’s Power through Covenants ,” Liahona , May 2023, 35–37

Other Resources about Covenants and Ordinances

Scriptures (“ Ordinances ” and “ Covenants ”)

Messages from Church leaders (“ Ordinances ” and “ Covenants ”)

Hymns and children’s songs

Resources for children (“ Ordinances ” and “ Covenants ”)

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ As We Go Forward Together ,” Ensign or Liahona , Apr. 2018, 7.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Overcome the World and Find Rest ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 97.

David A. Bednar, “ Bound to the Savior through Covenants ,” For the Strength of Youth , Feb. 2022, 5.
