Cross
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/cross?lang=eng

“Cross,” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Cross

The Crucifixion of Jesus Christ is part of His atoning sacrifice . It is a foundational doctrine in Heavenly Father’s plan of salvation . Through His suffering in Gethsemane, Crucifixion on the cross, and subsequent Resurrection, Christ overcame sin and death, allowing all the opportunity to come unto Him and receive salvation and exaltation.

The symbol of the cross is used in many Christian churches as a sincere expression of faith in Jesus Christ. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints remember with reverence the Savior’s suffering both in Gethsemane and at Calvary. We believe “that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures” ( 1 Corinthians 15:3–4 ). The Bible , Book of Mormon , Doctrine and Covenants , and Pearl of Great Price all emphasize the saving significance of Christ’s death on a cross.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints does not display the cross on its buildings or in its chapels or classrooms or similar places. However, its teachings are focused on the doctrine of Christ’s miraculous Atonement that happened in Gethsemane and on the cross.

Like many other Christian faiths, the Church emphasizes the living, resurrected Christ. This is why the official symbol for the Church is an image of the resurrected, living Christ, who guides His Church today through revelation to His prophet . This symbol also serves as a reminder that we can each have hope in a glorious resurrection because of the suffering, death, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

As is also true of other Christians, the way we live our lives is a primary way we demonstrate our love for the Savior and His work.

Related Topics

Atonement of Jesus Christ

Death, Physical

Death, Spiritual

Easter

Jesus Christ

Resurrection

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Note

For more information, see Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Lifted Up upon the Cross ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 77–79.
