Dating
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/dating-and-courtship?lang=eng

“Dating,” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Dating

In cultures where it is acceptable, dating can help people develop friendships and eventually find an eternal companion. Church members will be blessed as they spend time with those who have high standards and who help them keep their covenants with God.

A good way to get to know those of the opposite sex is through wholesome group activities. Group and one-on-one dating activities should wait until youth are more mature—age 16 or older is a good guideline. For their emotional and spiritual development and safety, it is best for youth to save exclusive relationships until they are older and are ready to think more seriously about marriage.

Opportunities to date will vary according to individual circumstances. Some may feel they have limited opportunities. Still, members can progress toward marriage by striving to be the type of person they would want to spend time with. When they begin to form more serious relationships, individuals should also carefully consider the qualities and attributes they would like to have in a future spouse. For instance, they might look for someone who loves the Lord and who is honest, kind, patient, hardworking, selfless, and humble and who shares a similar testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

However, those seeking a marriage partner need to keep in mind that no one is perfect. Couples should expect to learn and grow with each other. Elder David A. Bednar taught: “By divine design, men and women are intended to progress together toward perfection and a fulness of glory. … The man completes and perfects the woman and the woman completes and perfects the man as they learn from and mutually strengthen and bless each other.”

As deeper relationships develop, both partners can benefit from learning whether their long-term goals align. If they do, couples may find it helpful to start creating a plan for their future and acting on that plan in faith. Couples will also be blessed as they seek to have spiritual experiences and involve the Lord in their relationship. As they do this, they can be guided by the Spirit in their decisions, which can help them progress along the covenant path.

Dating can create opportunities to try new things, have fun, and better appreciate other people. At times, it can also be a long and difficult process. But Heavenly Father is aware of each individual and knows their unique situation. He will sustain them as they stay close to Him.

Through these varied experiences, it can help to remember that success in dating is achieved as individuals learn and grow, exercise faith and trust in the Lord, and become more like Jesus Christ.

Related Topics

Family

Marriage

Related Content

Messages from Church leaders

Notes

See For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices (2022), 13 .

See For the Strength of Youth , 13 .

David A. Bednar, “ Marriage Is Essential to His Eternal Plan ,” Ensign , June 2006, 83–84.
