Debt
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/debt?lang=eng

Overview

Debt

Overview

Since the early days of the Church, the Lord’s prophets have repeatedly warned against the bondage of debt. One of the great dangers of debt is the interest that accompanies it. When it is necessary to incur debt, such as a reasonable amount to purchase a modest home or to complete one’s education, the debt should be repaid as quickly as possible.

True to the Faith, a Church publication, gives the following additional counsel regarding debt:

“Some forms of credit, such as credit cards, have particularly high interest rates. Once you are in debt, you find that interest has no mercy. It continues to accumulate, regardless of your situation—whether you are employed or jobless, healthy or sick. It never goes away until the debt is paid. Do not be deceived by credit offers, even if they make debt seem attractive by promising low interest rates or no interest for a certain period of time.

“Look to the condition of your finances. Discipline yourself in your purchases, avoiding debt to the extent you can. In most cases, you can avoid debt by managing your resources wisely. If you do incur debt, such as a reasonable amount in order to purchase a modest home or complete your education, work to repay it as quickly as possible and free yourself from bondage. When you have paid your debts and accumulated some savings, you will be prepared for financial storms that may come your way. You will have shelter for your family and peace in your heart” ( True to the Faith, 2004, 48–49 ).

Related Topics

Family Finances

Scriptures

Scripture References

2 Kings 4:7

Psalm 37:21

Luke 16:10–11

Doctrine and Covenants 19:35

Doctrine and Covenants 104:78–80

Scripture Study Resources

Topical Guide, “Debt”

Topical Guide, “Family, Managing Finances in”

Guide to the Scriptures, “Debt”

Messages from Church Leaders

Climbing Out of Debt

President Gordon B. Hinckley

Guide to Family Finance

Elder Marvin J. Ashton

Additional Messages

Videos

“Becoming Provident Providers”

“He Polished My Toe”

“Teachings of Heber J. Grant: The Lord’s Law of Financial Success”

“Principle 4: Manage Money”

Learning Resources

General Resources

“Welfare Principles and Leadership,” Handbook 2, 6

“Self Reliance: How to Live Below Your Means,” Latter-day Saints Channel

Church Magazines

“Provident Living Prepares Us for the Future,” Ensign, October 2012

“How We Broke the Chains of Debt,” Ensign, February 2011

“Managing Resources Wisely and Staying Out of Debt,” Ensign or Liahona, February 2010

“Happily Living within Our Means,” Ensign, January 2008

“Taming the Debt Dragon,” Ensign, October 2004

“Five Steps to Financial Well-Being,” Ensign, March 2004

“Escaping the Debt Trap,” Ensign, August 1996

In the News

“Tips for Living Providently during the Holidays,” Church News

“Our Path to Spiritual and Temporal Self-Reliance,” Church News

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“Temporal and Spiritual Labor, ‘Hand in Hand Together’”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Wilford Woodruff, chapter 22

“Thrift, the Foundation of Prosperity”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith, chapter 19

“Obedience to the Law of Tithing”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith, chapter 31

“Principles of Financial Security”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Heber J. Grant, chapter 13

“Temporal Salvation for Ourselves and Others”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: George Albert Smith, chapter 20

“Providing in the Lord’s Way”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Harold B. Lee, chapter 18

“Provident Living: Applying Principles of Self-Reliance and Preparedness”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Spencer W. Kimball, chapter 11

Media

Images

Stay Out of Hot Water
