Divorce
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/divorce?lang=eng

Overview

Divorce

Overview

When men and women marry, they make solemn covenants with each other and with God. Every effort should be made to keep these covenants and preserve marriage. When divorce occurs, individuals have the obligation to forgive, lift, and help rather than to condemn.

The sanctity of marriage and families is taught repeatedly in the scriptures. It has been reaffirmed by modern prophets and apostles. Despite the truths taught about the sanctity of marriage, divorce has become commonplace in the world. Because the family is central to Heavenly Father’s plan for His children, Satan seeks to destroy marriages and families. Because of the poor choices and selfishness of one or both marriage partners, marriages sometimes end in contention, separation, and divorce.

If, instead of resorting to divorce, each individual will seek the comfort and well-being of his or her spouse, couples will grow in love and unity. The gospel of Jesus Christ—including repentance, forgiveness, integrity, and love—provides the remedy for conflict in marriage.

Those who have caused a divorce through their own poor choices can repent and be forgiven. Those whose marriages have failed because of what others have done can receive strength and comfort from the Lord, who promised: “Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. … For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light” ( Matthew 11:28, 30 ).

Related Topics

Charity

Family

Love

Marriage

Temples

Scriptures

Scripture References

Matthew 19:3–12

Doctrine and Covenants 42:22

Scripture Study Resources

Bible Dictionary, “Divorce”

Topical Guide, “Divorce”

Guide to the Scriptures, “Divorce”

Index to the Triple Combination, “Divorce ”

Messages from Church Leaders

Divorce

President Dallin H. Oaks

However Long and Hard the Road

Elder Jeffrey R. and Patricia T. Holland

The Tongue of Angels

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland

Marriage and Divorce

President Spencer W. Kimball

Additional Messages

Videos

“Marriage and Divorce”

“Saving Your Marriage”

Learning Resources

Church Magazines

“Ministering to Members Who Are Divorced,” Ensign, July 2018

“A Different Christmas,” Friend or Liahona, December 2016

“If my parents were sealed in the temple and then got divorced, which one am I sealed to?” New Era, August 2015

“Help! Someone’s Getting a Divorce,” Friend, August 2015

“Hope and Healing after Divorce,” Ensign, March 2014

“Overcoming Family Challenges,” New Era, December 2012

“Children of Divorce,” Ensign, August 2002

“Rebuilding My Life After Divorce,” Ensign, June 2000

“How the Atonement Helped Me Survive Divorce,” Ensign, April 1997

“Mending Our Marriage,” Ensign, October 1996

Study Manuals

May 13–19: Matthew 19–20; Mark 10; Luke 18

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: New Testament 2019

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“The Eternal Union of Husband and Wife”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith, chapter 20

“Experiencing Happiness in Marriage”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: David O. McKay, chapter 15

“Eternal Marriage”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Fielding Smith, chapter 15

“Honorable, Happy, Successful Marriage”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Spencer W. Kimball, chapter 18

“Strengthening Our Families”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Spencer W. Kimball, chapter 19

Teaching Resources

Stories and Activities for Teaching Children

“Divorce,” Lesson Helps for Teaching Children
