Education
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/education?lang=eng

“Education,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Education

As we become acquainted with truth in good sources of all kinds, we are better prepared to work in the world and serve in the kingdom of God. The Lord revealed, “The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth.” All truth comes from Heavenly Father and is designed for the good of His children. God wants us to educate our minds, improve our skills, and perfect our abilities so we can be a better influence for good in the world, provide for ourselves, our family, and those in need, and build God’s kingdom.

All truth, whether religious or secular, is included in God’s plan for our salvation and happiness. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, “Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life … he will have so much the advantage in the world to come.”

The Lord has given each of us gifts and encourages us to improve upon them and seek other gifts. He has also instructed us to “seek learning, even by study and also by faith.” Church leaders encourage members to engage in efforts to increase literacy, learning, and skills training.

God’s modern-day prophets have encouraged both men and women to get as much education as they can. President Gordon B. Hinckley told young men to “work for an education. Get all the training that you can.” President Thomas S. Monson urged the young women of the Church to “pursue your education—if you are not already doing so or have not done so.”

Related Topics

Commandments

Self-Reliance

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Life Help

Notes

Doctrine and Covenants 93:36 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 88:78-80 .

Doctrine and Covenants 130:18-19 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 46:8,11 ; 1 Corinthians 12:31 .

Doctrine and Covenants 88:118 .

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ Living Worthy of the Girl You Will Someday Marry ,” Ensign , May 1998, 50.

Thomas S. Monson, “ Three Goals to Guide You ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2007, 119.
