Environmental Stewardship and Sustainability
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/environmental-stewardship-and-conservation?lang=eng

“Environmental Stewardship and Sustainability,” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Environmental Stewardship and Sustainability

This beautiful earth is the creation of God . To truly reverence the Creator, we must appreciate His creations. The earth, all living things, and the expanse of the universe all eloquently witness of Him. As beneficiaries of this divine creation, “we should care for the earth, be wise stewards over it, and preserve it for future generations.”

The earth and all of God’s creations on it are part of His plan for the redemption of His children and should be used “with judgment, not to excess,” to sustain the human family. Our care of the earth is “an integral component of our discipleship” and a sacred responsibility. We are accountable to God for our care of the earth and those in need.

For more information, see “ Caring for the Earth .”

God Cares about the Earth

Accounts of the Creation show that God cares about all He has made—His children, the earth, and all living things on it. The earth and all life on it were first created spiritually, and the great variety of life forms God created give the earth its beauty and diversity.

The earth and its creations are eternal . The earth will ultimately be sanctified and receive celestial glory. It will be the home of the righteous, who will enjoy God’s presence.

The Role of the Earth in the Plan of Salvation

The earth is the place where God’s children experience mortality , exercise agency , learn from their experiences, improve, and progress. Most important, the earth is where the Savior took a mortal body and completed the incomparable gift of His Atonement by suffering for our sins, dying on the cross, and bringing about the Resurrection .

The earth also teaches us. We can learn, for example, the laws, principles, and patterns by which it functions. We learn respect and humility when we observe nature and its powerful forces. The earth allows us to see the works of God that bear testimony of Him.

We Are Stewards of the Earth and Its Resources

God has made us accountable for the care and preservation of the earth and the wise use of its resources. As stewards, we must be diligent in using the earth’s resources wisely, using only what we need and being conscious of the effects of our actions on the environment and others.

We strive to make our homes, neighborhoods, and cities beautiful, recognizing that doing so requires careful consideration based on local circumstances. We preserve resources and protect for future generations the spiritual and temporal blessings of nature.

The Earth and Its Resources Can Provide for All

The earth has many natural resources that will provide for the human family if they are used as the Lord instructed—to care for the poor and those in need and to not use more than is required, to avoid waste, and to not forcibly take resources from another. The fulness of the earth is to be used with wisdom and restraint.

The Second Coming of Jesus Christ and Caring for the Earth

Even though the earth will be perfected after the Lord’s Second Coming, we still need to take care of it now. God has given the earth and the good things that come of it as blessings to us. They provide for our temporal needs but also bring us joy. To be complacent with or misuse His creations offends God.

How the Church Practices Wise Stewardship and Conservation

To learn about the Church’s ongoing environmental sustainability initiatives in its operations, humanitarian efforts, and universities, see the Church Newsroom article “ Caring for the Earth—News .”

How You Can Care for the Earth

For ideas on how to care for the earth personally and in your community, see “ How Can We Better Care for the Earth? ”

Related Topics

Creation

Mortality

Plan of Salvation

Stewardship

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Videos

Notes

See Genesis 1:1 ; John 1:10 ; 2 Nephi 2:14 ; Moses 2:1 .

See Alma 30:44 ; Doctrine and Covenants 88:45, 47 .

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Creation ,” Ensign , May 2000, 86.

See 1 Nephi 17:36 ; Moses 1:39 ; Abraham 3:24–25 .

Doctrine and Covenants 59:20 .

Gérald Caussé, “ Our Earthly Stewardship ,” Liahona , May 2022, 58; see also Patrick Kearon, “ Latter-day Saints and Environment ,” ChurchofJesusChrist.org

See Doctrine and Covenants 104:13–18 .

See Moses 3:4–5 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 77:1 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 88:18–19 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 88:25–26 .

See Abraham 3:24–25 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 88:42–47 .

See Alma 30:44 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 104:13–15 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 49:19–21 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 104:14–18 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 49:19–21 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 59:20 .

See Articles of Faith 1:10 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 59:20 ; Moses 2:31 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 59:18–19 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 59:20–21 .
