Family
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/family?lang=eng

“Family,” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Family

As spirit sons and daughters of heavenly parents, we are all members of the family of God. Families are an essential part of God’s plan for His children . The Lord has designed the family to be the basic unit of the Church and of society. They are one of the greatest blessings we can have in this life.

A family often consists of a husband and wife and children and sometimes other relatives living under the same roof. A family can also be a single parent with children or a husband and wife without children. Some couples have adopted or foster children in their family. Extended family members not living with us are also our family. And sometimes we have close friends we regard as family.

Families today can face many challenges. Despite our best efforts, sometimes family life is hard. Sometimes there is conflict. Sometimes family members make choices we don’t agree with. But our families will be blessed as we strive to love and support each other, no matter the choices individual family members make. Following the gospel of Jesus Christ can help us keep our families strong.

Whatever our circumstances—single, married, divorced, or widowed—all belong in the family of God. Each person is important in His plan, and all can play a vital role in building His kingdom. As we take part in Church gatherings and activities, we can develop a sense of family and belonging with our fellow members. This shared feeling of belonging can bless us all.

God Commands Us to Have Families

God designated Adam and Eve as the first couple on the earth. When Adam and Eve were married, they became a family. “The first commandment that God gave to Adam and Eve pertained to their potential for parenthood as husband and wife.” That commandment to have children still applies today.

When they were cast out of the Garden of Eden, Adam had to work to provide food for himself, and Eve, his wife, labored with him. They learned the gospel and sought to keep the commandments . They also had opportunities to teach their children.

Husbands and wives today are also blessed as they partner with the Lord and with each other in caring for, nurturing, and teaching their families. As they do this, couples can find joy and strength in the Lord and be of one heart and one mind in their shared responsibilities.

God organizes us into families so that we can experience happiness and learn attributes such as kindness, love, patience, and selflessness. These traits help us become more like God and help prepare us to live happily as families throughout eternity. Family relationships formed on earth can continue after this life if we are sealed in the temple and remain faithful to our covenants .

The Promise of an Eternal Family

All Church members face trials and have to work to overcome weaknesses. The gospel of Jesus Christ blesses all God’s children, regardless of their family situation. While God’s work of salvation and exaltation is meant to be centered in the home, the Church helps support parents and families in their efforts to live and teach the gospel of Jesus Christ.

If we do our best to build our families around the teachings of Jesus Christ—including faith , prayer , repentance , forgiveness , respect, charity , compassion, work, and wholesome fun —home can be a place of refuge, peace, and happiness.

All may seek for every blessing our Heavenly Father has for His children—including the blessing of an eternal marriage and family. We can do this even as we work to overcome our challenges with the help of Jesus Christ and to find joy in our current circumstances.

Related Topics

Children of God

Dating

Divorce

Family councils

Family finances

Home evening

Marriage

Parenting

Sealing

Temples

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Gospel Study Guide

Videos

Life Help

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

See David A. Bednar and Susan K. Bednar, “ A Welding Link ” (worldwide devotional for young adults, Sept. 10, 2017), Gospel Library.

“ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library; see also Genesis 1:26–28 .

See “ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ” and Neil L. Andersen, “ The Personal Journey of a Child of God ,” Liahona , May 2021, 47–48.

See Moses 5:1 .

See Moses 5:1–12 .

See Moses 5:12 .

See Ulisses Soares, “ In Partnership with the Lord ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 42–45.

See Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ In Praise of Those Who Save ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2016, 80.

See “ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library.

See 2 Nephi 2:25 .
