Fasting
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/fasting-and-fast-offerings-study-guide?lang=eng

“Fasting,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Fasting

Drawing closer to God and helping those in need

Going without nourishment might sound like going hungry, and that can be true. But when we go without food and drink because we’re obeying the law of the fast, we aren’t just skipping meals; we’re keeping one of God’s commandments that helps us spiritually draw closer to Him.

Through fasting and prayer, we put aside some of the things we physically rely on and choose to depend on God instead. We worship Him and seek His blessings of comfort, guidance, and strength. We also fast and pray for others when they are sick or in need of specific blessings. As we accept the Lord’s invitation to fast, we become more compassionate, more loving, more humble, and more willing to serve—more like Jesus Christ.

What Is Fasting?

Fasting typically includes “praying, going without food and drink for a 24-hour period (if physically able), and giving a generous fast offering.” Latter-day Saints are invited to fast at least once a month and voluntarily contribute the amount of money they would have spent on food during their fast to help others in need. Both individuals and groups can fast. Fasting is more than “simply going hungry”—it is a way to “lift our hearts, our minds, and our voices in communion with our Heavenly Father” and seek His will and His blessings.

Topic overview: Fasting

Related gospel study guides: Prayer , Revelation , Caring for Those in Need

Section 1

God Established the Law of the Fast and Fast Offerings to Bless His Children

God’s people lived the law of the fast anciently (see Exodus 34:28 ; Esther 4:16 ; Matthew 6:16–18 ; Alma 45:1 ). The Lord also reintroduced this law in our day (see Doctrine and Covenants 88:76 ). Latter-day Saints fast by going without food and drink for a 24-hour period if they are physically able. Those who are not able to fast from food and drink for 24 hours may decide what would be an appropriate fast to help them remember Jesus Christ.

Church members regularly fast together, typically on the first Sabbath of each month. They also voluntarily give a monetary donation, called a fast offering, at least equal to the value of the meals they did not eat during their fast. Their donation helps provide food, housing, clothing, and other essentials for those in need. Fasting also brings spiritual blessings. President Dallin H. Oaks taught, “Our fasting to help the hungry is an act of charity and, when done with pure intent, is a spiritual feast.”

Things to think about

Since ancient times, the law of the fast has blessed God’s children. Read Isaiah 58:6–11 to learn about some of these blessings. Then read Matthew 25:35–40 . What do these verses teach about the importance of fasting and caring for those in need? Perhaps you could prayerfully consider these verses the next time you fast or make a fast offering. How does focusing on Jesus Christ make your experience with the law of the fast more meaningful?

In the Church, a fast and testimony meeting is held every month. Read Alma 5:45–48 to learn how fasting can strengthen your testimony of Jesus Christ. Perhaps you could review these verses before the next fast and testimony meeting you attend. How could bearing your testimony of what you know, believe, and feel about Jesus Christ bring more purpose to your fast? How could it help others who are fasting? You may also want to record the spiritual promptings you receive as you listen to others’ testimonies and then act on them.

Activities for learning with others

Fasting is a sacred privilege that brings miracles. Watch the video “ Fast Offerings: Are We Not All Beggars ” (2:31), and then talk about how the law of the fast helps us care for and love others as Jesus would. You could also read or sing the hymn “Because I Have Been Given Much” together. Talk about how the Lord has been generous to you as you have lived the law of the fast. Make a list or draw pictures of the miracles you have experienced, and discuss how they bless your life.

President Henry B. Eyring taught: “Your fast offering will do more than help feed and clothe bodies. It will heal and change hearts.” Review President Eyring’s message “ Is Not This the Fast That I Have Chosen? ” together. You could then share how giving or receiving fast offerings has healed and changed your heart. How have these experiences increased your love for God’s children? How have they helped you feel the Lord’s love for you?

Learn more

Dean M. Davies, “ The Law of the Fast: A Personal Responsibility to Care for the Poor and Needy ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2014, 53–55

Carl B. Pratt, “ The Blessings of a Proper Fast ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2004, 47–49

Church History Topics, “ Fasting ,” Gospel Library

Section 2

Fasting and Prayer Help Prepare Us for God’s Blessings

Latter-day Saints fast for many reasons. Fasting is a way to help others, worship God, and show gratitude for Him (see Alma 45:1 ). We can also fast to seek personal revelation from God or to ask Him to bless the sick and the afflicted (see Psalm 35:13 ; Alma 5:46 ). Through fasting, we can gain strength to resist temptations and receive comfort during trials (see Matthew 4:2–4 ; Alma 30:1–2 ). In addition, fasting helps us be more humble, as it reminds us of our total dependence on God (see Psalm 35:13 ).

Fasting and prayer go together. Fasting can add an element of sincerity and commitment to our prayers, and prayer elevates our fast from simply skipping meals to having a true communion with God. Together, fasting and prayer have a powerful effect on our humility and faith in Christ (see Helaman 3:35 ).

Things to think about

Sometimes fasting can be difficult, but it also brings many spiritual blessings. Read Matthew 4:1–4 , including the Joseph Smith Translation of verses 1 and 2 , for an example of when Jesus Christ fasted. Why was it important for Jesus to be with God at this time? Consider how fasting and prayer can help you draw closer to God. How could you make prayer a more intentional part of your fast? Act on any impressions you receive.

Fasting and prayer can help you be an instrument in the Lord’s hands. Read Alma 17:1–3, 9 . What spiritual blessings came to the sons of Mosiah from fasting and prayer that helped them do the Lord’s work? What can you learn from their example as you minister to God’s children, fulfill your calling, and share the gospel?

Activities for learning with others

In his talk “ Christ Is Risen; Faith in Him Will Move Mountains ,” President Russell M. Nelson shared a story of Saints in Samoa, Fiji, Tahiti, and Tonga who fasted and prayed for a miracle. Read this story, and then talk about the mountains, or challenges, in your own life (see Matthew 17:14–21 ). What do you learn from President Nelson’s words about how fasting and prayer could bring the Lord’s power into your life? You might discuss your thoughts after looking at pictures of mountains or going on a hike together. You could also talk about the blessings and opportunities you have received as you have fasted and prayed with faith.

Fasting usually means not eating or drinking, but we can also participate in different types of fasts. In the women’s session of the October 2018 general conference, President Nelson counseled: “I invite you to participate in a 10-day fast from social media and from any other media that bring negative and impure thoughts to your mind. Pray to know which influences to remove during your fast. The effect of your 10-day fast may surprise you. What do you notice after taking a break from perspectives of the world that have been wounding your spirit? Is there a change in where you now want to spend your time and energy? Have any of your priorities shifted—even just a little? I urge you to record and follow through with each impression.” As a group, talk about some things you could fast from that may be preventing you from being closer to God. Then take on President Nelson’s challenge. After your fast, discuss how prayer guided your experience and how you were blessed for fasting in this way.

Learn more

Nehemiah 1 ; Acts 10:30–33 ; 13:3 ; Mosiah 27:22 ; Alma 17:3 ; 3 Nephi 27:1–2 ; Doctrine and Covenants 59:13–14

James B. Martino, “ Turn to Him and Answers Will Come ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2015, 58–60

“ The Hope of God’s Light ” (video), Gospel Library

Other Resources about Fasting

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for Teaching Children

Notes

General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 38.8.16 , Gospel Library.

Joseph B. Wirthlin, “ The Law of the Fast ,” Ensign , May 2001, 73.

See Russell M. Nelson, “ Opening the Heavens for Help ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 74.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Followers of Christ ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2013, 98.

See M. Russell Ballard, “ Remember What Matters Most ,” Liahona , May 2023, 107.

See Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Are We Not All Beggars? ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2014, 42.

“ Because I Have Been Given Much ,” Hymns , no. 219.

Henry B. Eyring, “ Is Not This the Fast That I Have Chosen? ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2015, 24.

See Russell M. Nelson, “ Christ Is Risen; Faith in Him Will Move Mountains ,” Liahona , May 2021, 104.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Sisters’ Participation in the Gathering of Israel ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2018, 69.
