First Vision
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/first-vision-study-guide?lang=eng

“First Vision,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

First Vision

Joseph Smith saw God the Father and Jesus Christ

The scriptures share many accounts of prophets who communicated with God (see Amos 3:7 ). The Bible teaches that God spoke with Moses “face to face” ( Exodus 33:11 ). Book of Mormon prophets also talked with or had personal visits from Jesus Christ and received direction from Him for their day (see, for example, 3 Nephi 11 ).

After Jesus’s death and Resurrection and the death of His Apostles, Christ’s Church was corrupted by changes to His doctrine and ordinances. For centuries the world was in a state of spiritual darkness without the presence of Christ’s Church. In the spring of 1820, the young Joseph Smith was concerned for the welfare of his soul and sought to know which church he should join. He went to the woods near his home and prayed to ask God for direction. In answer to his prayer, God the Father and Jesus Christ appeared to Joseph. Like Moses, Joseph spoke with God face to face. This event, known as the First Vision, began the Restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ in our day (see Joseph Smith—History 1:7–20 ).

What Is the First Vision?

In the spring of 1820, a young man named Joseph Smith prayed in the woods near his home in the state of New York, USA. In response to his prayer, God the Father and Jesus Christ appeared to him. Following this revelation, Joseph Smith was called to be a prophet of the Lord, and the Restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ began.

Topic overview: First Vision

Related gospel study guides: Prophets , Restoration of the Gospel , Revelation

Section 1

You Can Learn for Yourself That the First Vision Really Happened

The reality of the appearance of God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ to young Joseph Smith is an essential aspect of the Restoration of Christ’s Church. The First Vision establishes the fact that the heavens are open and God is speaking to man again.

We can study Joseph Smith’s accounts of the First Vision . We can also ask God if the First Vision truly happened ( Moroni 10:4–6 ). As we do these things, the Holy Ghost will teach us the truth of the First Vision (see Alma 5:45–46 ).”

Things to think about

President Gordon B. Hinckley taught: “Our whole strength rests on the validity of that vision. It either occurred or it did not occur. If it did not, then this work is a fraud. If it did, then it is the most important and wonderful work under the heavens.” How does the reality of the First Vision affect your life? If you have not yet received a testimony of its validity, how will you strive to do so?

As you learn about the First Vision, it may be helpful to read the various accounts Joseph Smith gave of the event. They are available at “ Accounts of Joseph Smith’s First Vision ” on the Joseph Smith Papers website. Why do you think Joseph Smith chose to emphasize different details in certain accounts? What new insights about the First Vision have you gained by studying the different accounts?

Activity for learning with others

Watch the video “ Ask of God: Joseph Smith’s First Vision ” (6:35) together. Share with group members that this video was created using details from each of Joseph Smith’s accounts of the vision. How do you feel as you watch this depiction? What did you learn that you’ve never considered before? Invite group members to share their impressions and ideas.

Learn more

Isaiah 29:13–14 ; Joel 2:28–29 ; Ephesians 1:10 ; 2 Nephi 3:6–15 ; Joseph Smith—History 1:23–26

“ The First Vision: The Father and the Son Appear to Joseph Smith ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 27–35

“ The First Vision: Journey to the Sacred Grove ,” Church History, history.ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“ The First Vision ,” New Era , Aug. 2018, 44

The First Vision: A Joseph Smith Papers Podcast

Section 2

Understanding the First Vision Can Strengthen Your Testimony of the Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ

In addition to the significant role the First Vision played in the Restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, we can also learn essential truths of the gospel by studying Joseph Smith’s vision. The nature of God, the need for a restoration of Christ’s Church, the purpose of the gospel, and other important truths were all revealed at that time.

The appearance of God the Father and Jesus Christ clarified truths about the nature of God that had been lost over the centuries. One of the most important of these is that Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ are two separate beings with bodies that look like ours (see Joseph Smith—History 1:17 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 130:1, 22 ). Jesus Christ answered Joseph Smith’s questions about the religious environment of the day and told Joseph that the true Church of Jesus Christ was not on the earth (see Joseph Smith—History 1:19–20 ). And in two simple words, God the Father taught Joseph an essential skill for anyone seeking truth: He pointed to Jesus Christ and commanded, “Hear Him!” ( Joseph Smith—History 1:17 ).

Things to think about

Read Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf’s talk “ The Fruits of the First Vision ,” paying attention to the “fruits” he discusses and how they relate to your life. How has the First Vision influenced you? What does it mean to you? You could record your thoughts in your journal.

Read “ A Faithful Search Rewarded ,” by Elder Patricio M. Giuffra. In this general conference address, Elder Giuffra lists five essential truths he learned during the missionary lesson where he first heard the story of the First Vision. Which of these truths have personal significance to you? How have these truths strengthened your testimony and blessed your life?

Activities for learning with others

While the First Vision was a miraculous event, it was only the beginning of the Restoration of the gospel. Many spiritual outpourings followed. Consider this fact as you read together from “ The Restoration of the Fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: A Bicentennial Proclamation to the World. ” As you read, stop periodically to discuss the angelic visitations that came after the First Vision. Why do you think the Restoration began with a vision of Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ? How did the First Vision lay the foundation for what was to come?

Among the truths we learn from the First Vision is that God responds to His children when they are in distress. Watch the trailer for The First Vision: A Joseph Smith Papers Podcast , where Church historian Spencer W. McBride discusses this truth. Then invite group members to share their feelings and insights.

Learn more

Joseph Smith—History 1:5–26

Neil L. Andersen, “ Strengthen Your Faith through the First Vision ,” Ensign or Liahona , Apr. 2020, 52–55

Adilson de Paula Parrella, “ Essential Truths—Our Need to Act,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 115–16

Section 3

The First Vision Can Teach You How to Learn Truth

You can learn from Joseph Smith’s example how to seek truth. Joseph Smith’s history states that he wanted to know which church to join. He had this question on his mind as he read from the Bible, so when he read James 1:5–6 , this passage was especially meaningful to him: “If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering.”

President Russell M. Nelson taught, “If Joseph Smith’s transcendent experience in the Sacred Grove teaches us anything, it is that the heavens are open and that God speaks to His children.” While answers to your questions may not come through a vision, you can still be sure that God hears and answers your prayers. As you put forth diligent effort and put your faith in God, you can be sure—like Joseph Smith—that God will keep His promises.

Things to think about

As we learn about the gospel of Jesus Christ, we all have questions. Some are answered easily, while others may require great effort. What questions do you have about the gospel, the scriptures, or the words of living prophets? With your questions in mind, read 1 Nephi 15:6–11 . What do you learn from these verses about how to receive revelation? How can you exercise faith in Jesus Christ as you wait for the answers you seek?

Read the article “ The First Vision: A Pattern for Personal Revelation,” by President Henry B. Eyring. What do you learn from this article about preparing to receive personal revelation? What small changes can you make in your life to help you be more receptive to the promptings of the Holy Ghost?

Activities for learning with others

Read 1 Nephi 10:17–19 as a group. What do you learn from these verses about God’s willingness to answer our prayers? What personal experiences have you had with receiving personal revelation? Invite group members to share their ideas and experiences as appropriate.

Invite group members to read or listen on their own to President Nelson’s address “ Revelation for the Church, Revelation for Our Lives.” Ask them to pay special attention to his teaching about receiving personal revelation. Then gather as a group, and invite each person to share what he or she learned. Do you notice any patterns in what your group members found instructive? What can you learn from President Nelson and from your group about how you can better receive personal revelation?

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 42:61 ; 88:63, 118

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ The Message, the Meaning, and the Multitude,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2019, 6–8

Richard J. Maynes, “ The First Vision: Key to Truth,” Ensign , June 2017, 61–65

“ Prayer and Personal Revelation ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 125–34

Other Resources about the First Vision

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for Teaching Children

Notes

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ The Marvelous Foundation of Our Faith,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2002, 80.

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ The Fruits of the First Vision ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2005, 36–38.

Patricio M. Giuffra, “ A Faithful Search Rewarded ,” Liahona , Nov. 2021, 22–23.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Revelation for the Church, Revelation for Our Lives ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2018, 95.

Henry B. Eyring, “ The First Vision: A Pattern for Personal Revelation ,” Ensign , Feb. 2020, 12–17.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Revelation for the Church, Revelation for Our Lives ,” 93–96.
