Food Storage
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/food-storage?lang=eng

Overview

Food Storage

Overview

“Our Heavenly Father created this beautiful earth, with all its abundance, for our benefit and use. His purpose is to provide for our needs as we walk in faith and obedience. He has lovingly commanded us to ‘prepare every needful thing’ (see Doctrine and Covenants 109:8 ) so that, should adversity come, we may care for ourselves and our neighbors, and support bishops as they care for others.”

“We encourage members worldwide to prepare for adversity in life by having a basic supply of food and water and some money in savings. We ask that you be wise, and do not go to extremes. With careful planning, you can, over time, establish a home storage supply and a financial reserve.” (See All Is Safely Gathered In .)

What am I supposed to have in my food storage?

There are three main components of food storage:

Food supply (three-month and long-term)

Water supply

Financial reserve

Store foods that are a part of your normal diet in your three-month supply. As you develop a longer-term storage, focus on food staples such as wheat, rice, pasta, oats, beans, and potatoes that can last 30 years or more. Learn more about a long-term food supply .

How much food storage do I need?

Take the amount of food you would need to purchase to feed your family for a day and multiply that by 7. That is how much food you would need for a one-week supply. Once you have a week’s supply, you can gradually expand it to a month, and eventually three months.

For longer-term needs, and where permitted, gradually build a supply of food that will last a long time and that you can use to stay alive, such as wheat, white rice, and beans. A portion of these items may be rotated in your three-month supply. (See All Is Safely Gathered In .)

Where should I store my food storage?

Make sure your food storage is properly packaged and stored in a cool, dry place.

If water comes directly from a good, pretreated source, then no additional purification is needed; otherwise, pretreat water before use. Store water in sturdy, leak-proof, breakage-resistant containers. Consider using plastic bottles commonly used for juices or soda. Keep water containers away from heat sources and direct sunlight. Learn more about water storage and purification .

How much does it cost?

Costs may vary depending on where and how you purchase your food storage. It is important to remember that you should not go to extremes; for instance, it is not prudent to go into debt to establish your food storage all at once. Develop it gradually to diffuse the overall cost over time so that it will not become a financial burden.

Related Topics

Emergency Preparedness

Emergency Response

Employment

Family Finances

Gardening

Self-Reliance

Messages from Church Leaders

To Men of the Priesthood

President Gordon B. Hinckley

To the Boys and to the Men

President Gordon B. Hinckley

“If Ye Are Prepared Ye Shall Not Fear”

Elder L. Tom Perry

Lay Up in Store

Bishop Keith B. McMullin

Additional Messages

Videos

“Family Home Storage—Meet Jean”

“Family Home Storage—Meet Maureen”

Learning Resources

General Resources

Find a home storage center near you , providentliving.org

All Is Safely Gathered In

Frequently Asked Questions
