Forgiveness
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/forgiveness-study-guide?lang=eng

“Forgiveness,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Forgiveness

Receiving hope and healing through Jesus Christ

Forgiveness is God’s gift to us. Through our Savior, Jesus Christ, we can receive forgiveness as we repent. Sometimes it can feel overwhelming to seek forgiveness of things we regret. But as we forsake our sins and experience a change of heart through the atoning power of Jesus Christ, we find healing, peace, and a renewed sense of joy.

In this life, we also learn to extend forgiveness to those who may have hurt or offended us. Forgiving others may be difficult, especially when someone has wounded us deeply. But by following the Lord’s commandment to forgive and by relying on Jesus Christ, we can find relief from pain and have hope for the future. Forgiving others also helps us develop Christlike attributes so we are better prepared to receive eternal life and live with our Heavenly Father once more.

What Is Forgiveness?

To receive forgiveness is to have our sins and mistakes—great or small—pardoned in full. This is made possible through the Atonement of Jesus Christ. Because He suffered for our sins, we can be made clean again as we sincerely repent and have faith in the Savior’s ability to heal us. Through God’s mercy we can feel peace, strength, and joy as we forsake our sins. The Savior has also commanded us to forgive others as He forgives us.

Topic overview: Forgiveness

Related gospel study guides: Faith in Jesus Christ , Repentance , Baptism , Judgment , Charity

Section 1

The Lord Promises Forgiveness When We Sincerely Repent of Our Sins

Heavenly Father has given us commandments to help us stay on the covenant path and return to live with Him once more. Through the gift of agency, we choose to follow our Savior’s example and keep the commandments as He did. Of course, we won’t be perfect in keeping the commandments—we will often make mistakes due to our personal struggles, weaknesses, and temptations. But as we exercise our faith in the Savior and His atoning sacrifice, we can overcome our sins and shortcomings. We can also find peace in the knowledge that God promises forgiveness to all who repent and keep the commandments (see 1 John 1:9 ; Doctrine and Covenants 1:31–32 ).

When we repent and are baptized and confirmed, we receive forgiveness of our sins and are given the gift of the Holy Ghost (see Acts 2:38 ). Each time we partake of the sacrament, we make a covenant with the Lord and can have our sins forgiven by offering the Lord a broken heart and a contrite spirit (see Moroni 6:1–4 ).

Through the process of repentance, our hearts are changed and we desire to do good and serve others (see Mosiah 5:2 ; Alma 36:24 ). We feel joy because of the goodness of God and strive to retain a remission of our sins (see Mosiah 4:10–12, 26 ). As we sincerely repent, make and keep our covenants, and endure to the end, we become sanctified and worthy of returning to our Heavenly Father’s presence (see 3 Nephi 27:19–22 ).

Things to think about

King Benjamin’s people were filled with joy and peace of conscience when they received a remission of their sins. Read Mosiah 4:1–3 and ponder how placing your faith in Jesus Christ and His atoning sacrifice can bring joy and peace to your life. Are there ways you can more completely give your will over to God as you forsake your sins?

When Alma the Younger was converted to the gospel, he no longer felt the pain of his former sins (see Alma 36:12–14, 17–24 ). Consider watching this video of President Russell M. Nelson explaining what a mighty change of heart is and how we can truly be converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ. How are you striving to be converted to the Lord? How has your conversion blessed your life and the lives of those around you?

Activities for learning with others

When we seek forgiveness, we look for opportunities to grow—even transform—through our Savior, Jesus Christ. Watch a time-lapse video about some things in nature that go through a transformation, such as a caterpillar transforming into a butterfly or a seed transforming into a flower. Discuss how we have the potential to become something beautiful through Jesus Christ and His Atonement.

President Nelson has taught that we all need to repent and that when we do so daily, we will become the best version of ourselves. Review his talk “ We Can Do Better and Be Better ,” and discuss how you can repent each day to gain a fresh perspective of yourself, God, and the world (see also Guide to the Scriptures, “ Repent, Repentance ,” Gospel Library).

Learn more

Isaiah 1:18 ; 55:6–7 ; Ezekiel 18:21–22 ; Enos 1:4–8 ; Mosiah 26:30 ; Doctrine and Covenants 61:2

Dale G. Renlund, “ Repentance: A Joyful Choice ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2016, 121–24

Craig A. Cardon, “ The Savior Wants to Forgive ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2013, 15–17

Camille N. Johnson, “ Jesus Christ Is Relief ,” Liahona , May 2023, 81–83

Section 2

The Lord Commands Us to Forgive Others

When Christ was on the cross, He asked the Father to forgive the soldiers who crucified Him. This act of love is a perfect example of forgiveness and reminds us to forgive as He did.

During His mortal ministry, the Savior taught us to love our enemies and to “do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you” ( Matthew 5:44 ). We may feel that it is impossible to pray for those who have deeply hurt us, but doing so shows God that we are putting our faith in Him. President M. Russell Ballard taught, “Sincerely praying for those who may be considered our enemies demonstrates our belief that God can change our hearts and the hearts of others.”

In Doctrine and Covenants 64:8–11 , we learn that if we choose not to forgive, we are at greater fault than the person who has wronged us. As we offer forgiveness to everyone, we show God not only that we are willing to keep His commandments but also that we trust Him to do what is best for His children.

Things to think about

In honor of Easter in 2023, President Nelson invited people all over the world to experience the miracle of forgiveness. He said: “I promise that as you forgive, the Savior will relieve you of anger, resentment, and pain. The Prince of Peace will bring you peace.” Is there a grudge you are harboring or hurt you are feeling because you have been reluctant to forgive someone? Consider what steps you can take toward forgiveness, and reflect on how Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ will guide you.

As we diligently pray for His help, the Savior can give us the strength we need to forgive others, even when it seems impossible. President Nelson taught: “The Savior will grant you the ability to forgive anyone who has mistreated you in any way. Then their hurtful acts can no longer canker your soul.” Ponder how forgiveness is the Savior’s gift to us and how He makes it possible for you to forgive even when it feels out of reach. How does thinking of forgiveness as a gift bring you hope?

Activities for learning with others

Sometimes it requires just as much courage to forgive as it does to seek forgiveness. Discuss some examples of people who have offered forgiveness in difficult circumstances. What blessings come as we forgive others? Invite everyone to think of someone who has hurt or offended them in some way and to pray for that individual on their own time. You might also suggest they try serving that person if it’s appropriate for their situation, and invite them to see if it changes the way they feel toward the individual.

When we ask for the Savior to strengthen us through His atoning sacrifice, we can receive the spiritual momentum we need to forgive others. Demonstrate what momentum is—perhaps by showing a video of a train that picks up speed or an athlete doing an impressive stunt. Read sections of President Nelson’s talk, and discuss how the Savior can empower us to forgive those who have deeply hurt us as we focus on our spiritual momentum.

Learn more

Matthew 18:21–22 ; Ephesians 4:32 ; 1 Nephi 7:16–21 ; Mosiah 26:31 ; Doctrine and Covenants 42:88

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ The Ministry of Reconciliation ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2018, 77–79.

“ The Power of Forgiving ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 391–99

Kristin M. Yee, “ Beauty for Ashes: The Healing Path of Forgiveness ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 36–38

“ President Uchtdorf: Forgiveness ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Other Resources about Forgiveness

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Resources for children

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ We Can Do Better and Be Better ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 67–69.

See Joseph Smith Translation, Luke 23:35 (in Luke 23:34 , footnote c ).

M. Russell Ballard, “ Watch Ye Therefore, and Pray Always ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2020, 78.

“ Forgiving Others: An Easter Message from President Russell M. Nelson ” (video), Gospel Library.

“ Four Gifts That Jesus Christ Offers to You ” (First Presidency Christmas devotional, Dec 2, 2018), broadcasts.ChurchofJesusChrist.org.

See Russell M. Nelson, “ The Power of Spiritual Momentum ,” Liahona , May 2022, 97–100.
