Garments
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/garments?lang=eng

“Garments,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Garments

Adult members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who receive the endowment enter into sacred promises, known as covenants , to follow the highest standards of moral integrity and dedication to God. As part of entering into these covenants in the temple , members receive a simple undergarment—often referred to as the “temple garment” or “garment of the Holy Priesthood.” Unlike other ceremonial clothing used during the endowment, the garment is worn underneath members’ normal clothing for the rest of their lives, serving as a daily physical reminder of their covenant relationship with God.

In ancient times, the Lord commanded the prophet Moses to make special clothing for his brother Aaron and others who would officiate in the tabernacle: “Thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty … that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.” 1 This included clothing that was visible to an observer and clothing worn underneath these outer layers.

In our day the garment encourages modesty , but its significance is much deeper. For Church members who have received the endowment, the garment reminds them of their connection to God, their commitment to follow His will, and the blessings and protection God has promised the faithful. The First Presidency of the Church has stated that how the garment is worn “is an outward expression of an inward commitment to follow the Savior.” 2

A brief video is available that provides additional context about temple garments and temple ceremonial clothing.

Additional teachings by modern-day prophets and apostles referencing the temple garments can be viewed at ChurchofJesusChrist.org/temples/prophetic-teachings-on-temples .

Related Topics

Priesthood

Related Content

Gospel Study Guide

Notes

Exodus 28:2–3 .

First Presidency letter, Oct. 10, 1988.
