Gifts of the Spirit
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/gifts-of-the-spirit-study-guide?lang=eng

“Gifts of the Spirit,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Gifts of the Spirit

Spiritual blessings received through the Holy Ghost

Imagine you have just received a thoughtful gift. The person who picked it out took extra care to give you something that would bless not only your life but also the lives of those around you. When you open the gift and see what’s inside, you realize it’s more precious than anything you ever could have imagined.

Similarly, Heavenly Father is ready and willing to give us precious gifts to bless us. These gifts are called spiritual gifts. There are many kinds of spiritual gifts, and each one can strengthen and help us. But it’s up to us to seek after them, receive them, and use them to do Heavenly Father’s work.

What Are Gifts of the Spirit?

Gifts of the Spirit are spiritual blessings or abilities given through the Holy Ghost to faithful members of the Church. They are given for the “edifying of the church” ( 1 Corinthians 14:12 ) and “for the benefit of the children of God” ( Doctrine and Covenants 46:26 ). The scriptures speak of many different spiritual gifts we may receive (see 1 Corinthians 12:1–11 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 46:11–25 ). Heavenly Father will bestow these gifts upon us as we earnestly seek them (see Doctrine and Covenants 46:8–9 ).

Topic overview: Spiritual Gifts

Related gospel study guides: Gift of the Holy Ghost , Faith in Jesus Christ , Hope , Charity

Section 1

Heavenly Father Gives Spiritual Gifts to the Faithful

God gives us spiritual gifts, or spiritual blessings, as we love Him and strive to keep His commandments (see Doctrine and Covenants 46:9 ). Through these gifts, we can receive blessings in our own lives and bless the lives of others. Spiritual gifts bring added power in a world where evil is continually increasing, and through these blessings we can find spiritual safety and peace.

Things to think about

The Apostle Paul taught that just as every part of the body serves an important purpose, each spiritual gift is necessary to the “body of Christ,” or the body of the Church ( 1 Corinthians 12:27 ). Consider reading 1 Corinthians 12:12–30 and then reflecting on how our spiritual gifts can work together for the blessing of all. How have you seen the spiritual gifts of others work together, like the parts of a body work together? How have you been blessed because of another’s spiritual gifts? You might also ponder your spiritual gifts and how they could help build up God’s kingdom. Act on any promptings you receive.

When we partake of the sacrament, we are promised that we can always have the Holy Ghost to be with us—and it is through the power of the Holy Ghost that we receive spiritual gifts. Consider reading the sacrament prayers (see Doctrine and Covenants 20:77, 79 ) and pondering how making and keeping your covenants can help you be ready to receive spiritual gifts.

Activity for learning with others

Has your testimony ever been strengthened by someone else’s? Maybe you can recall a specific memory of when someone’s faith deepened your own. Or perhaps you feel the benefits of a friend’s or family member’s testimony every day. In Doctrine and Covenants 46:13–14 , we learn that believing someone’s testimony of Jesus Christ is a spiritual gift. You could watch this video of President Dieter F. Uchtdorf describing how he received that gift as a young man through the examples, love, and service of his friends. Then share with each other similar experiences you have had with this spiritual gift. How has your life been blessed by the faithful examples of those around you?

Learn more

Romans 12:4–8 ; Moroni 10:24–25

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Spiritual Gifts ,” Ensign , Sept. 1986, 68–72

“ Gifts of the Spirit ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 115–23

Section 2

Discover the Gifts God Has Given You

God has given each of us spiritual gifts and asks that we strive to “always remember, and always retain in [our] minds what those gifts are” ( Doctrine and Covenants 46:10 ). How do we identify our spiritual gifts so we can remember them? We can start by searching the scriptures, which provide many examples of spiritual gifts. These include faith, the gift of tongues, the working of miracles, and a testimony of Christ (see 1 Corinthians 12:8–10 ; Moroni 10:9–16 ; Doctrine and Covenants 46:13–25 ).

We can recognize our spiritual gifts as we “reference our patriarchal blessing, ask those who know us best, and personally identify what we are naturally good at and enjoy. Most important, we can ask God (see James 1:5 ; Doctrine and Covenants 46:9 ; Doctrine and Covenants 112:10 ).” As we discover the gifts Heavenly Father has given us, we can come to know Him and ourselves better.

Things to think about

Discovering spiritual gifts takes faith and patience, but the Lord can guide you in the process. Perhaps you could read Doctrine and Covenants 112:10 and reflect on how God can help you discover your spiritual gifts. Then ask God in your prayers to help you learn about the spiritual gifts He has given you. You might also ask family members, friends, and mentors to help you recognize the spiritual gifts you have been blessed with. As you discover your spiritual gifts, record them so you can remember them and learn more about them.

As we discover our spiritual gifts, the Lord can work through us to bless those around us. In his talk “ I Have a Work for Thee ,” Elder John C. Pingree Jr. shared a story about one woman who was given the spiritual gift of noticing others. He said, “She has found joy in noticing those who are regularly forgotten, and God has worked through her to bless many.” Review the section titled “ Discover and Develop Spiritual Gifts ” in Elder Pingree’s message. What spiritual gifts do you have that could help you accomplish the work God has for you? Are there spiritual gifts you could discover that could help you in your personal ministry? Write down any impressions you receive, and then act on them.

Activity for learning with others

Some of our spiritual gifts may not be as obvious to us as others. For instance, some individuals have “the gift of not passing judgment; the gift of looking to God for guidance; the gift of being a disciple; the gift of caring for others; the gift of being able to ponder; the gift of offering prayer; [and] the gift of bearing a mighty testimony.” What are some spiritual gifts you see in others in your group? Write down what comes to mind, and then discuss how each of these gifts is a blessing to all. You might also take note of the spiritual gifts your group notices in you and consider how you can develop them.

Section 3

Seeking and Using Spiritual Gifts Help Us Become More like Christ

The Lord invites us to earnestly seek the best spiritual gifts, such as faith, hope, and charity (see Moroni 10:30 ; Doctrine and Covenants 46:8 ; see also Ether 12:28 ). As we strive to exercise these spiritual gifts, we become more like Jesus Christ. This makes us more capable of serving the way He would so that “our hands can become His hands; our eyes, His eyes; our heart, His heart.”

Things to think about

Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin taught: “I urge you to examine your life. Determine where you are and what you need to do to be the kind of person you want to be. Create inspiring, noble, and righteous goals that fire your imagination and create excitement in your heart. And then keep your eye on them. Work consistently towards achieving them.” How can you apply this counsel to seeking and developing spiritual gifts? How could these gifts help you become more like Jesus Christ? Perhaps you could write down a spiritual gift you hope to develop and an idea for how you can start working on it. As you seek to obtain and exercise that gift, keep track of how it blesses you in your everyday life and how it blesses others. You could also offer a prayer of gratitude to give thanks for the spiritual gifts you have been given (see Doctrine and Covenants 46:32 ).

Activities for learning with others

Becoming more Christlike through spiritual gifts requires practice. Elder Juan Pablo Villar said: “It is more likely that [Heavenly Father] will give us opportunities to develop [spiritual] gifts rather than just granting them to us without spiritual and physical effort. If we are in tune with His Spirit, we will learn to identify those opportunities and then act upon them.” Watch the video “ Faith and the Goal ” (4:40), and talk about the effort that goes into building a physical talent. Then discuss the work needed to develop spiritual gifts. What opportunities can you take advantage of to practice your spiritual gifts? How can working on your spiritual gifts help them become a part of you?

There may be times when we remember to use our spiritual gifts and other times when we forget. That’s to be expected—no one is perfect. What matters most is that we invite the Lord into the process. Consider singing the hymn “ More Holiness Give Me .” Notice how the lyrics plead for help in becoming more like the Savior. How can you seek God’s guidance in using your spiritual gifts so you become more like Him? You might also write down the spiritual gifts mentioned in the hymn and choose to learn more about them in Guide to the Scriptures . Discuss what you find about these gifts and ideas you have for developing them.

Learn more

Matthew 25:14–30 ; Hebrews 11:1–35 ; Doctrine and Covenants 93:12–13

Henry B. Eyring, “ Gifts of the Spirit for Hard Times ,” Ensign , June 2007, 18–24

Gary E. Stevenson, “ Promptings of the Spirit ,” Liahona , Nov. 2023, 42–45

George Q. Cannon, “ Seeking Spiritual Gifts ,” Ensign , Apr. 2016, 80

Other Resources about Gifts of the Spirit

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

Preach My Gospel: A Guide to Missionary Service (2018), 97; see also Doctrine and Covenants 46:8–9 .

See Neil L. Andersen, “ A Classroom of Faith, Hope, and Charity ” (evening with a General Authority, Feb. 28, 2014), ChurchofJesusChrist.org .

John C. Pingree Jr., “ I Have a Work for Thee ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 33.

See John C. Pingree Jr, “ I Have a Work for Thee ,” 33–34.

Marvin J. Ashton, “ There Are Many Gifts ,” Ensign , Nov. 1987, 20.

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ You Are My Hands ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2010, 68.

Gary E. Stevenson, “ Promptings of the Spirit ,” Liahona , Nov. 2023, 43.

Juan Pablo Villar, “ Exercising Our Spiritual Muscles ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 96.

Hymns , no. 131 .
