God the Father
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/god-the-father-study-guide?lang=eng

“God the Father,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

God the Father

The Father of our spirits, who loves each of us perfectly

The book of Revelation depicts God sitting on a throne as a king (see Revelation 3:21 ; 4:2, 10 ; 5:1 ). But we can also think about Him in a personal way. As our loving Heavenly Father, He really does care about us : our feelings, our experiences, our hopes, and our dreams. Members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles wrote, “It is significant that of all the titles of respect and honor and admiration that are given to [God], He has asked us to address Him as Father.”

Who Is Heavenly Father?

God the Father is the Supreme Being in whom we believe, whom we worship, and to whom we pray. He is the author of the plan of salvation and exaltation. God is the Father of our spirits and loves us. His work and glory are “to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” ( Moses 1:39 ). He is perfect, has all power, and knows all things. He “has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man’s” ( Doctrine and Covenants 130:22 ).

Topic overview: God the Father

Related gospel study guides: Godhead , Children of God , Premortal Life , Worship God the Father , Eternal Life

Section 1

We Can Know God

On the night of the Savior’s suffering in Gethsemane, Jesus Christ prayed to Heavenly Father: “And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent” ( John 17:3 ). Because God loves us, He invites us to know Him so that we might inherit eternal life. The more we learn what Heavenly Father is like, the more we want to become like Him.

Things to think about

What do you know about Heavenly Father? You could study some or all of the following scriptures, looking for things that have been revealed about Him:

Matthew 5:48

John 3:16–17

2 Corinthians 1:3–4

Hebrews 12:9

Mosiah 4:9

Doctrine and Covenants 130:22

The Lord Jesus Christ said, “I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me” ( John 14:6 ), and, “Come and follow me” ( Matthew 19:21 ). What do these passages teach that will help you in your effort to know God the Father?

Activity for learning with others

Even little children can become acquainted with God the Father and feel a closeness with Him. You could sing songs such as “ I Am a Child of God ” ( Hymns , no. 301), “ I Know My Father Lives ” ( Hymns , no. 302), or “ Teach Me to Walk in the Light ” ( Hymns , no. 304). Then discuss what they learn about Heavenly Father from these songs.

Learn more

John 14:6–9 ; Doctrine and Covenants 84:37–38

“ God the Eternal Father ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 37–44.

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ The Grandeur of God ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2003, 70–73

Section 2

We Are All Spirit Sons and Daughters of God

Even though there is great diversity within the human family, one uniting truth is that we are all children of a loving Heavenly Father (see Hebrews 12:9 ). “All human beings—male and female—are created in the image of God. Each is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny” (“ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library).

God wants each of His children to have enduring joy in this life and receive the blessing of living with Him throughout eternity.

Things to think about

God offers rich promised blessings to the faithful that are beyond our ability to comprehend (see 1 Corinthians 2:9–10 ). He has shared many details about these blessings in the scriptures. You might study Doctrine and Covenants 76:50–70 and look for some of the blessings that await those who follow God.

Consider watching “ Earthly Father, Heavenly Father ” (3:59). How can our family roles on earth provide us with a small view of what God wants us to become?

Activity for learning with others

Study Genesis 1:26–27 . What similarities do we have with God? Why is it helpful to know not only that we are spirit children of God but also that our physical bodies were created in His image?

Section 3

You Can Strengthen Your Relationship with Heavenly Father

Often, when we want to feel closer to family members or friends, we do things with them such as talking, spending time together, and understanding them better. Heavenly Father wants us to be close to Him—and He wants to be close to us. His invitation to us is this: “Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you” ( Doctrine and Covenants 88:63 ). Imagine what it means that the most powerful Being in the universe wants to communicate with us and draw close to us.

The memory of our premortal life with God has been withheld from us. But President Ezra Taft Benson explained that “nothing is going to startle us more when we pass through the veil to the other side than to realize how well we know our Father and how familiar His face is to us.”

Things to think about

There are many ways in which we can begin and strengthen our relationship with Heavenly Father. You could try some of the ideas taught in these scripture passages:

Psalm 24:3–4

John 14:15, 21

Jacob 4:10–11

Alma 34:17–19

Activity for learning with others

Consider asking others to find one thing in the room that represents something that can strengthen our relationship with Heavenly Father. Ask them to share what they found and what it represents. Discuss together something you all can work on that will bring you closer to God.

Learn more

1 Nephi 2:16

Dale G. Renlund, “ That I Might Draw All Men unto Me ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2016, 39–42

Neill F. Marriott, “ Abiding in God and Repairing the Breach ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 10–12

Other Resources about God the Father

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Resources for children

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

“ Father, Consider Your Ways ,” Ensign , June 2002, 12.

Ezra Taft Benson, “ Jesus Christ—Gifts and Expectations ,” Ensign , Dec. 1988, 6.
