Godhead
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/godhead-study-guide?lang=eng

“Godhead,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Godhead

Belief in God the Father; in His Beloved Son, Jesus Christ; and in the Holy Ghost

When people say, “I believe in God,” what do they mean? They might mean many different things.

As Latter-day Saints, “we believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost” ( Articles of Faith 1:1 ). We call this statement the first article of our faith—first because understanding these three divine beings is a first step in understanding who we are, why we exist, and what we can become.

What Is the Godhead?

The Godhead consists of three divine beings: Heavenly Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. Though separate persons, They work together in perfect unity to bless and exalt Heavenly Father’s children.

Topic overview: Godhead

Related gospel study guides: God the Father , Jesus Christ , Holy Ghost

Section 1

How the Godhead Is Described in the Scriptures

God the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost want you to know about Them. They don’t want to seem distant or mysterious. They have revealed important truths, through the scriptures and teachings of latter-day prophets, to help you know Them better. In addition, God invites us to approach Him individually and know Him through personal experiences with Him. As Jesus said in a prayer to God the Father on behalf of His followers, “This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent” ( John 17:3 ).

Things to think about

Try exploring passages of scripture that mention multiple members of the Godhead—for example, Matthew 3:16–17 ; 17:5 ; John 5:19 ; 14:6–10, 26 ; Acts 7:55–56 ; 3 Nephi 11:10–11, 25–27, 35–36 . What do passages like these reveal about the members of the Godhead? What do you learn about Their relationship with each other?

God has revealed important truths about the Godhead in our day through the Prophet Joseph Smith. For an example, read Joseph Smith—History 1:13–17 with this question in mind: What does Joseph’s experience reveal about the Godhead?

You could also read what the Prophet Joseph taught about the Godhead in Doctrine and Covenants 130:22 . These teachings differ in important ways from what traditional Christianity teaches. Think about why truths like these about the Godhead matter to you.

Activity for learning with others

You could read Doctrine and Covenants 130:22 with others and look at a picture of Joseph Smith’s First Vision. Talk together about what the verse teaches and what everyone sees in the picture. Draw attention to the fact that Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ have bodies like ours—we are created in Their image!

Learn more

Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Godhead and the Plan of Salvation ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2017, 100–103

Section 2

United in Blessing Us

Although there are three distinct members of the Godhead, They are “one God” in the sense that They are perfectly united in purpose. And what is that purpose? Heavenly Father has said, “This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” ( Moses 1:39 ). In other words, Heavenly Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost work together to accomplish the plan of salvation and exaltation. Each has a specific role to play in that plan, but Their objective is the same—to help you return to live with God again.

Things to think about

One way to learn how the members of the Godhead work together is to study the various titles given to each of Them. You might list some of these titles, as described in scriptures like these:

Heavenly Father: Malachi 2:10 ; Hebrews 12:9 ; Doctrine and Covenants 121:32

Jesus Christ: John 1:29 ; Helaman 15:13 ; Doctrine and Covenants 110:4 ; Moses 4:2

Holy Ghost: John 14:26 ; 16:13 ; Doctrine and Covenants 76:53

Several hymns and children’s songs teach about the different roles of the members of the Godhead. A few are suggested below. Consider singing or listening to some of them. Note what you learn about how the members of the Godhead work together to bless you.

“ Guide Us, O Thou Great Jehovah ” ( Hymns , no. 83)

“ Our Savior’s Love ” ( Hymns , no. 113)

“ I Know My Father Lives ” ( Children’s Songbook , 5)

“ The Holy Ghost ” ( Children’s Songbook , 105)

Activity for learning with others

You can illustrate the unity of the Godhead with a three-legged stool, a tripod, or something else that is stable and functional because it has three legs. Or you might consider how members of a team or an orchestra work together to accomplish a single goal. We can think of them as one stool, one team, or one orchestra—just as the Godhead is one God—with each member fulfilling a separate role and working with the others in unity.

Learn more

Acts 7:55–56 ; 1 Corinthians 8:6 ; Ephesians 2:18 ; Doctrine and Covenants 76:22–24

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Knowing the Godhead ,” Ensign , Jan. 2016, 32–39

Other Resources about the Godhead

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children
