Grace
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/grace-study-guide?lang=eng

“Grace,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Grace

God’s gift of love, mercy, and help

God loves and cares for you and each one of His children. He mercifully bestows upon us divine help and assistance, which the scriptures refer to as “grace.” God’s grace is made possible because of the Atonement of Jesus Christ. We all fall short in our efforts to keep God’s commandments, so we do not merit or earn the gift of grace. Rather, grace is freely given by Heavenly Father, making it possible for us to receive rich blessings. When you strive to increase your faith in Jesus Christ, you will recognize countless examples of His grace and goodwill in your life.

What Is Grace?

Grace is the gift of divine help and strength we receive from Heavenly Father through the Atonement of Jesus Christ. The scriptures often speak of grace as the enabling power and spiritual healing offered through His mercy and love. All God’s blessings and tender mercies come to us through the grace of Jesus Christ.

Topic overview: Grace

Related gospel study guides: Jesus Christ , Atonement of Jesus Christ , Salvation , Faith in Jesus Christ

Section 1

Look for God’s Grace in Your Life and You Will Feel His Abundant Love

When you believe in Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, you begin to see how much They have done for you, simply because They love you. We receive many blessings from God, whether or not we recognize the divine source. Other blessings are reserved for those who seek to keep Heavenly Father’s commandments, repent of sins, and humbly turn to Him in sincere prayer asking for what they need. Yet none of us can earn God’s assistance and guidance (see Romans 3:23–24 ; Mosiah 2:20–21 ). All divine blessings are given through God’s grace.

Understanding divine grace can give you confidence to seek God’s help daily because He is merciful and willing to exercise divine power in your behalf (see Hebrews 4:14–16 ; Moroni 8:3 ). Jesus Christ’s mortal life is an example of growing spiritually and receiving a fulness of blessings through the grace of Heavenly Father (see Doctrine and Covenants 93:12–13 ). Jesus Christ invites you to come unto Him and God the Father and receive Their grace so you can be fully blessed and glorified as They are (see Doctrine and Covenants 93:19–20 ).

Things to think about

Nephi declared, “My soul delighteth in [the Lord’s] grace” ( 2 Nephi 11:5 ). What does God’s grace mean to you? Why do you think Nephi used the word delight to describe his feelings about God’s grace?

President Dieter F. Uchtdorf taught, “[An] element of God’s grace is the opening of the windows of heaven, through which God pours out blessings of power and strength, enabling us to achieve things that otherwise would be far beyond our reach.” What steps might you take to receive the blessings of divine power and strength God is ready to share with you?

Activity for learning with others

Invite members of your group to read Ether 12:27 . Discuss examples of weakness that are commonly experienced by God’s children. Talk about the potential change that can come to a person through the divine power of God’s grace. Invite participants to remember times when they have felt the power of God’s grace. Invite them to share experiences as appropriate.

Learn more

1 Corinthians 2:9 ; 2 Corinthians 12:9–10 ; Ether 12:41 ; Moroni 10:32–33

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ The Gift of Grace ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2015, 107–10.

Brad Wilcox, “ His Grace Is Sufficient ,” Ensign , Sept. 2013, 35–37.

“ His Grace: Change Is Possible through Christ ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org .

Section 2

You Are Saved by the Grace of Jesus Christ

The prophet Lehi explained that “there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah” ( 2 Nephi 2:8 ). The greatest demonstration of God’s love is the Atonement of Jesus Christ, including His Resurrection. Because of that sacrifice, offered through the grace of Jesus Christ, He saves us from the permanent grasp of death and opens the way for each of us to repent of our sins and find forgiveness.

God will not force anyone to receive His grace and return to His presence. Therefore, He asks us to “reconcile [ourselves] to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; … it is only in and through the grace of God that [we] are saved” ( 2 Nephi 10:24 ). As humble followers, we come unto Jesus Christ through faith, repentance, baptism, receiving the Holy Ghost, and striving to keep His commandments. By doing so, we show our desire to do all we can while recognizing that His grace is what saves us (see 2 Nephi 25:23 ).

Things to think about

Read 2 Nephi 25:23 and consider the following insight from President Dieter F. Uchtdorf:

“We are not saved ‘because’ of all we can do. Have any of us done all that we can do? …

“I am certain Nephi knew that the Savior’s grace allows and enables us to overcome sin. This is why Nephi labored so diligently to persuade his children and brethren ‘to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God’ [ 2 Nephi 25:23 ].

“After all, that is what we can do! And that is our task in mortality!”

Why is it important to view grace as a gift rather than something to be earned?

Activity for learning with others

Watch Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf talk about grace in the video “ Saved by Grace ” (1:41). Talk together about the importance of personal accountability in God’s plan for our salvation. Why do we need to repent if we are saved by God’s grace?

Learn more

Ephesians 2:4–8 ; Titus 2:11–14 ; 2 Nephi 10:23–25

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Have You Been Saved ?,” Ensign , May 1998, 55–57

Section 3

Grace Gives You Strength to Love and Serve God and Others

The Bible Dictionary states, “It is … through the grace of the Lord that individuals, through faith in the Atonement of Jesus Christ and repentance of their sins, receive strength and assistance to do good works that they otherwise would not be able to maintain if left to their own means” (“Grace”).

As a follower of Jesus Christ, you can receive divine help to serve God and others like the Apostle Paul, who observed, “I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me” ( Philippians 4:13 ). When we are called to serve in God’s kingdom, He qualifies us by providing grace to accomplish His work (see Alma 26:11–13 ). The gift of grace also provides individuals with extra strength to face life’s challenges (see Mosiah 24:14–15 ; Alma 31:30–35, 38 ).

Things to think about

Imagine breaking off a small branch from a tree or bush. Consider what would happen to the branch after being separated from its source. Read John 15:1–11 . What did Jesus want His disciples to understand about the power He offers to God’s children? How can this principle help you better understand how grace can strengthen you in your effort to minister to others?

Activity for learning with others

Watch the video “ The Atonement Enables Us ” (2:18). Talk together about the impact God’s grace has on our efforts to carry out good works. Why is it important to pray for the Lord’s grace when we seek to serve and minister to others?

Learn more

2 Corinthians 9:8 ; Jacob 4:7 ; Doctrine and Covenants 50:40–44

David A. Bednar, “ The Atonement and the Journey of Mortality ,” Ensign , Apr. 2012, 40–47.

Other Resources about Grace

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ The Gift of Grace ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2015, 108.

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ The Gift of Grace ,” 110.
