Grief
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/grief?lang=eng

Overview

Grief

Overview

Grief, the sense of suffering that accompanies loss, is a common part of mortality as we lose loved ones or experience other tragedies. Because Jesus Christ has suffered the pains and afflictions of all mankind, we can be comforted and healed as we pray to the Father in His name and rely upon His Atonement.

While serving as Presiding Bishop of the Church, Elder Merrill J. Bateman taught:

“Just as the lame man at the pool of Bethesda needed someone stronger than himself to be healed (see John 5:1–9 ), so we are dependent on the miracles of Christ’s atonement if our souls are to be made whole from grief, sorrow, and sin. If grieving parents and loved ones have faith in the Savior and his plan, death’s sting is softened as Jesus bears the believers’ grief and comforts them through the Holy Spirit. Through Christ, broken hearts are mended and peace replaces anxiety and sorrow. … As Isaiah stated concerning the Savior, ‘Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: … And with his stripes we are healed’ ( Isaiah 53:4–5 ).

“The prophet Alma also spoke of Christ’s healing power as he taught the Gideonites. Referring to Christ, Alma stated that he would go forth ‘suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. … And he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, … that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people’ ( Alma 7:11–12 ). Whatever the source of pain, Jesus understands and can heal the spirit as well as the body” (“ The Power to Heal from Within ,” Ensign or Liahona, May 1995, 13–14).

Related Topics

Atonement of Jesus Christ

Holy Ghost

Hope

Jesus Christ

Scriptures

Scripture References

Isaiah 53:3–10

Job 6:2

2 Corinthians 2:7–8

4 Nephi 1:44

Doctrine and Covenants 121:1–10

Doctrine and Covenants 127:2

Scripture Study Resources

Topical Guide, “ Grief ,” ” Suffering ,” “ Sorrow ,” “ Tribulation ”

Index to the Triple Combination, “ Grieve ”

Messages from Church Leaders

Doors of Death

President Russell M. Nelson

He Heals the Heavy Laden

President Dallin H. Oaks

“Lest Ye Be Wearied and Faint in Your Minds”

Elder Neal A. Maxwell

The Power to Heal from Within

Bishop Merrill J. Bateman

Videos

“Mountains to Climb”

“Lifting Burdens”

“Sunday Will Come”

“Until We Meet Again”

“The Comforter”

“His Grace: Drug Addiction and the Loss of a Loved One”

“Unto All the World: Amalia Rivas’ Story”

“Abide with Me”

Learning Resources

General Resources

“ Finding Solace after the Loss of a Loved One ,” ComeUntoChrist.org

“ Dealing with Depression ,” ComeUntoChrist.org

“ Uncharted Waters: Finding Comfort and Peace when Life Is Less Than Ideal ,” ComeUntoChrist.org

“ The Last Winter ,” Jesus the Christ, chapter 28

Church Magazines

“ I lost a dear friend recently. How do I deal with the grief? ” New Era, February 2015

Connie Goulding, “ Seeking Rescue ,” Ensign, June 2015

Steven Eastmond, “ The Healing Power of Grief ,” Ensign, January 2014

Ashley Isaacson Woolley, “ The Refining Fire of Grief ,” Ensign, February 2013

Stephen Havertz, “ Lifting the Hands Which Hang Down ,” Ensign, February 2013

“ Working through Grief ,” Ensign, March 2006

Catharine Rasband, “ Working through My Grief ,” Ensign, January 2003

Janna Nielsen, “ Carrying On ,” New Era, October 1997

Kristen Weaver, “ Where to Look ,” New Era, February 1997

Study Manuals

“The Life of Christ”

Gospel Principles, chapter 11

In the News

“ Viewpoint: Enjoy and Endure Seasons of Life ,” Church News

“ In Christ Shall All Be Made Alive ,” Newsroom

“ What Is This Thing That Men Call Death? ” Newsroom

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“Words of Hope and Consolation at the Time of Death”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith, chapter 14

“Understanding Death and Resurrection”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young, chapter 37

“Faithfulness in Times of Trial: ‘From the Shadows into the Glorious Sunshine’”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Lorenzo Snow, chapter 7

“Comfort in the Hour of Death”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Heber J. Grant, chapter 5

“The Resurrection, an Anchor to the Soul”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Harold B. Lee, chapter 23

“Tragedy or Destiny?”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Spencer W. Kimball, chapter 2

Teaching Resources

Teaching Outlines

“2 Corinthians 1–3”

New Testament Seminary Teacher Manual, lesson 113

Media

Audio

“ Loss of A Loved One—Part 1 ,” Gospel Solutions for Families, episode 25

“ Loss of A Loved One—Part 2 ,” Gospel Solutions for Families, episode 26

“ Tragedy to Triumph—Vickie Walker ,” Enduring It Well, episode 36

“ Brokenhearted Loss of a Sibling—The Ludlows ,” Enduring It Well, episode 11

Music

“A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief,” Hymns, no. 29

“I Need Thee Every Hour,” Hymns, no. 98

“Master, the Tempest Is Raging,” Hymns, no. 105

“Though Deepening Trials,” Hymns, no. 122

“Be Still, My Soul,” Hymns, no. 124

“Where Can I Turn for Peace?” Hymns, no. 129

“Abide with Me; ’Tis Eventide,” Hymns, no. 165

“Abide with Me!” Hymns, no. 166

Images

Everlasting Beginnings, Media Library

Pioneer Couple at Graves, Media Library

Christ Comforts Mary and Martha, Media Library
