Heaven
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/heaven?lang=eng

Overview

Heaven

Overview

In the scriptures, the word heaven is used in two basic ways. First, it refers to the place where God lives, which is the ultimate home of the faithful (see Mosiah 2:41 ). Second, it refers to the expanse around the earth (see Genesis 1:1 ).

Related Topics

Kingdoms of Glory

Scriptures

Scripture References

Psalm 11:4

Matthew 6:9

1 Nephi 1:8

Mosiah 3:8

Mosiah 2:41

Doctrine and Covenants 20:17

Doctrine and Covenants 76:50–70

Scripture Study Resources

Bible Dictionary, “ Heaven ”

Topical Guide, “ Heaven ,” “ Kingdom of God, in Heaven ”

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Heaven ”

Index to the Triple Combination, “ Heaven ,” “ Heavenly ”

Messages from Church Leaders

Glimpses of Heaven

President Spencer W. Kimball

The Revelations of Heaven

Elder L. Aldin Porter

Videos

“The Kingdom of Heaven”

Tabernacle Choir Videos

“ The Spirit of God ”

Learning Resources

General Resources

“ What Happens after We Die? ” ComeUntoChrist.org

Church Magazines

Sheila Kindred, “ Snapshots of Heaven ,” Friend, June 2005

Milton V. Backman Jr., “ Witnesses of the Glories of Heaven ,” Ensign, March 1981

In the News

“ Heaven ,” Newsroom

“ ABC’s Barbara Walters Discusses Heaven With Church Leader ,” Newsroom

“ Everyone Else Makes Such Lonely Heavens ,” Newsroom

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“Beyond the Veil: Life in the Eternities”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith, chapter 18

“The Spirit World”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young, chapter 38

“The Immortality of the Soul”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: George Albert Smith, chapter 7

“Safely Home at Last”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Harold B. Lee, chapter 24

Teaching Resources

Stories and Activities for Teaching Children

“ The Three Kingdoms of Heaven ,” Friend, February 1986

Media

Audio

“ Kingdom of Heaven ,” The Latter-day Saints Channel Q&A, episode 28

“ Three Degrees of Glory ,” The Latter-day Saints Channel Q&A, episode 11

Music

“Great King of Heaven,” Hymns, no. 63

“Father in Heaven,” Hymns, no. 133

“Home Can Be a Heaven on Earth,” Hymns, no. 298

“I Lived in Heaven,” Children’s Songbook, 4

Images

Down from Heaven, Media Library

Peace on Earth Comes from Heaven, Media Library
