Melchizedek Priesthood
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/high-council?lang=eng

“Melchizedek Priesthood,” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Melchizedek Priesthood

The Melchizedek Priesthood is the higher priesthood in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the lesser being the Aaronic Priesthood . Faithful male members of the Church can receive the Melchizedek Priesthood beginning at age 18. The name of the Melchizedek Priesthood comes from an important high priest who lived during the time of the prophet Abraham.

This greater priesthood was given to Adam and has been on the earth whenever the Lord has revealed His gospel. It was taken from the earth during the Great Apostasy, but it was restored in 1829 when the Apostles Peter, James, and John conferred it upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.

Melchizedek Priesthood Privileges and Responsibilities

When a man receives the Melchizedek Priesthood, he enters into the oath and covenant of the priesthood . He covenants to be faithful, magnify his calling, “give diligent heed to the words of eternal life,” and “live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God.” Those who keep this covenant will be sanctified, or made clean and holy, by the Spirit and receive “all that [the] Father hath.”

Worthy Melchizedek Priesthood holders have the authority to administer to the sick and give special blessings to family members and others. Men in the Church must also be worthy Melchizedek Priesthood holders in order to receive the temple endowment and be sealed to their spouse and their families for eternity.

Through the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood and under the direction of the Lord Jesus Christ, leaders guide the Church and direct the preaching of the gospel throughout the world. The Lord has also taught that we can see His power in the ordinances of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Offices of the Melchizedek Priesthood

The offices of the Melchizedek Priesthood are elder, high priest, patriarch , Seventy, and Apostle . The President of the High Priesthood is the President of the Church.

Elder. Elders may perform all the duties of the Aaronic Priesthood. In addition, with the authorization of presiding priesthood leaders, they can give the Holy Ghost and ordain other worthy men to offices in the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods. They can also give priesthood blessings.

High Priest. A high priest can perform all the duties of an elder and also has the right to officiate in the Church. Stake presidents, mission presidents, high councilors, bishops and their counselors, and other leaders of the Church are ordained as high priests.

Seventy. Today, the quorums of the Seventy include General Authority Seventies and Area Seventies. Members of the Seventy serve in the name of the Lord under the direction of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. General Authorities devote their full time to the ministry and serve throughout the world; Area Seventies serve part-time and are typically assigned to serve for a period of five years in their local areas.

Patriarch. A patriarch is a Melchizedek Priesthood holder who is ordained to give patriarchal blessings to members of the Church.

Apostle. An Apostle is an ordained leader in the Melchizedek Priesthood. They are chosen through inspiration by the President of the Church and ordained by the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles . They serve as witnesses of Jesus Christ to all the world.

High Council

The high council is made up of twelve high priests. These men serve under the direction of a stake presidency. They minister in teaching, training, and supervising other stake and ward leaders and programs.

Melchizedek Priesthood Quorums

A priesthood quorum is an organized group of men or young men who hold the priesthood. Quorum members “serve others, fulfill priesthood duties, build unity, and learn and live doctrine.”

Quorums are organized for both the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthoods . Each quorum is led by a president who holds the necessary priesthood keys, or authority, to lead the quorum. Where possible, two counselors and a secretary support him.

Each ward has one or more elders quorums. An elders quorum includes all elders and prospective elders (men age 19 or older who do not hold the Melchizedek Priesthood) in the ward. It also includes high priests who are not currently serving in the callings that make up the stake high priests quorum.

Each stake has one high priests quorum, which is led by the stake president and his counselors. The stake high priests quorum consists of current bishops and their counselors, high councilors, and functioning patriarchs .

Seventies and Apostles are organized into Melchizedek Priesthood quorums at the general Church level. Seventies serve under the direction of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles is the second-highest governing body in the Church. The First Presidency , which consists of the senior Apostle of the Church and two other Apostles, is the Church’s highest governing body and presides over all Church matters.

Related Topics

Aaronic Priesthood

Apostle

Elder

High Priest

Patriarch

Priesthood

Priesthood Blessing

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

See Genesis 14:18–20 .

Doctrine and Covenants 84:43–44 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 84:33 .

Doctrine and Covenants 84:38 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 84:20 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 107:64–66 .

For more information, see Doctrine and Covenants 20:38–45, 60–84 ; 42:44 ; 46:2 ; 107:7–12 ; 133:7–9 .

To learn more, see Hebrews 2:9–10, 17 ; 5 ; Alma 13:1–19 ; Doctrine and Covenants 107:9–12, 65–67 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 124:91–93 .

For more information, see Matthew 10:1–4 ; Ephesians 2:19–20 ; 1 Nephi 12:6–10 ; Doctrine and Covenants 18:26–33 ; 27:12 .

General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 8.1.1 .

See General Handbook , 6.2.1.1 .
