Gift of the Holy Ghost
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/holy-ghost-gift-study-guide?lang=eng

“Gift of the Holy Ghost,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Gift of the Holy Ghost

Having a member of the Godhead as a constant companion

Have you ever considered all the ways you’ve been blessed through the gift of the Holy Ghost? All of God’s children can experience the influence of the Holy Ghost guiding them to Jesus Christ and His gospel. But the gift of the Holy Ghost is reserved for those who, through faith in Jesus Christ and repentance, make covenants with Jesus Christ through baptism. This gift is the promise that you can enjoy the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost—a member of the Godhead. It is no ordinary gift—it can’t be seen—but its power is undeniable when you choose to receive it through righteous living. Those who receive the gift of the Holy Ghost are cleansed from sin, receive personal revelation, and enjoy the blessings known as “the gifts of the Spirit.”

What Is the Gift of the Holy Ghost?

The priesthood ordinance of confirmation comes after a person has been baptized by immersion in water. The ordinance is administered by the laying on of hands by one who holds the Melchizedek Priesthood. It’s during this ordinance that the gift of the Holy Ghost is given. The Holy Ghost is a member of the Godhead and can be a constant companion to those who strive to keep the commandments and invite Him into their lives.

Topic overview: Holy Ghost

Related gospel study guides: Holy Ghost , Covenants and Ordinances , Revelation , Gifts of the Spirit

Section 1

“Receive the Holy Ghost”

While someone is being confirmed a member of the Church, he or she is told to “receive the Holy Ghost.” The gift of the Holy Ghost is not forced on anyone. It becomes the responsibility of members to invite the Holy Ghost to be with them (see Doctrine and Covenants 88:33 ). Elder David A. Bednar said, “As we receive this ordinance, each of us accepts a sacred and ongoing responsibility to desire, to seek, to work, and to so live that we indeed ‘receive the Holy Ghost’ and its attendant spiritual gifts.”

Jesus explained to Nicodemus—a ruler of the Jews—that “except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God” ( John 3:5 ). So, in addition to being baptized by water, the Lord wants you to be “born of the Spirit” ( verse 6 ). This happens when you receive the gift of the Holy Ghost and experience a “baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost” (see 2 Nephi 31:13–14 ). Fire is symbolic of purification. This sanctifying power brings a remission of sins (see 2 Nephi 31:17 ; 3 Nephi 12:1–2 ). After baptism, Church members may experience the baptism of fire gradually (see 3 Nephi 9:20 ) or more directly (see Mosiah 4:2–3 ).

Things to think about

When the resurrected Jesus Christ ministered to the people in the Western Hemisphere, He gave the twelve disciples the power to confer the Holy Ghost (see 3 Nephi 18:36–37 ). The people were taught about this gift, and “they did pray for that which they most desired; and they desired that the Holy Ghost should be given unto them” ( 3 Nephi 19:9 ). How would you describe your feelings about the gift of the Holy Ghost?

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, “The baptism of water, without the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost attending it, is of no use; they are necessarily and inseparably connected.” To help you better understand the meaning of “baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost,” watch “ The Baptism of Fire ” (1:41). Based on Elder David A. Bednar’s comments in the video, how would you explain the meaning of “baptism of fire”?

Learn more

Acts 10 ; Moroni 2 ; Doctrine and Covenants 76:50–52

Boyd K. Packer, “ The Gift of the Holy Ghost: What Every Member Should Know ,” Ensign , Aug. 2006, 46–52

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 89–100

Section 2

The Holy Ghost Can Be Our Constant Companion

President Henry B. Eyring said: “We need the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost. We desire it, yet we know from experience that it is not easy to maintain. We each think, say, and do things in our daily lives that can offend the Spirit. The Lord taught us that the Holy Ghost will be our constant companion when our hearts are full of charity and when virtue garnishes our thoughts unceasingly (see D&C 121:45 ).” When you seek to cultivate a companionship with the Holy Ghost, you will sense what things need to change in your life.

Things to think about

The sacrament prayers are a powerful reminder that the Holy Ghost can always be with us (see Doctrine and Covenants 20:77, 79 ). When you worthily prepare for and partake of the sacrament, you invite the companionship of the Spirit. How has your life been blessed by striving to be worthy of His constant presence?

Activity for learning with others

Consider reading and talking about this statement by President Gordon B. Hinckley: “I think Mormon knew very well from his own experience the truth of his words that the ‘Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God’ ( Moro. 8:26 ). Though we may sometimes be alone while among those of the world, we need not be lonely, for the Lord has given us the Holy Ghost to be our companion to walk with us.” You might discuss why the prophet Mormon needed the blessings he described. When has the Holy Ghost extended peace and help to you?

Learn more

3 Nephi 27:20 ; Doctrine and Covenants 14:8 ; 20:77, 79 ; 121:45–46

David A. Bednar, “ That We May Always Have His Spirit to Be with Us ,” Ensign or Liahona , Apr. 2006, 28–31

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Always Have His Spirit ,” Ensign , Oct. 1996, 59–61

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ The Gift of the Holy Ghost ,” Ensign or Liahona , Jan. 2005, 5–7

Section 3

How Do I Know If I’m Feeling the Holy Ghost?

Have you ever tried to communicate with someone who speaks a language you don’t understand? It can be just as frustrating when someone says they are feeling the Spirit but you don’t know what that feels like for yourself. It’s nothing to be ashamed of, though, as we all feel the Spirit in different ways. Learning to recognize and understand how the Holy Ghost communicates with you can take time and effort. The prophet Elijah learned that the Spirit may be likened to a “still small voice” (see 1 Kings 19:11–12 ). Sometimes the Holy Ghost is manifested through feelings of hope and joy (see Romans 15:13 ). The Holy Ghost is an important way we learn truth (see John 14:26 ; Moroni 10:5 ).

Things to think about

Watch the video “ Feeling the Holy Ghost: Power of the Holy Spirit ” (3:17) to see how some Church members feel the Spirit. What are some ways the Holy Ghost has communicated with you?

Activity for learning with others

Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were translating the Book of Mormon when they learned that the Holy Ghost can sometimes be recognized through a “burning” feeling (see Doctrine and Covenants 9:8–9 ). Consider reading Doctrine and Covenants 6:22–23 ; 8:1–2 ; 11:11–14 and talking together about these common ways the Holy Ghost communicates with us. Discuss why it’s important to remember that a burning sensation is not the only way you may feel the Spirit.

Learn more

Galatians 5:22–23 ; 2 Nephi 32:5, 8 ; Doctrine and Covenants 8:1–2 ; 9:8–9

Preach My Gospel: A Guide to Missionary Service (2019), 95–105

Boyd K. Packer, “ The Candle of the Lord ,” Teaching Seminary: Preservice Readings , 32–34.

Ronald A. Rasband, “ I ‘Hear Him’ by Responding to Promptings ,” Inspiration (blog), Oct. 21, 2021, ChurchofJesusChrist.org .

“ Hear Him ” video collection

Other Resources about the Gift of the Holy Ghost

Scriptures

Messages from general conference

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

David A. Bednar, “ Receive the Holy Ghost ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2010, 95.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 89 .

Henry B. Eyring, “ The Holy Ghost as Your Companion ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2015, 104–7.

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ Living with Our Convictions ,” Ensign , Sept. 2001, 5.
