Hope
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/hope-study-guide?lang=eng

“Hope,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Hope

Confidence that eternal promises will be fulfilled through Jesus Christ

Life often brings unexpected, difficult circumstances that can lead us to feel discouraged, overwhelmed, and defeated. During such times, Heavenly Father does not leave us vulnerable and alone. He offers many spiritual resources—including the gift of hope—that help us find strength, courage, and an anticipation of a joyful future (see Moroni 9:25 ).

To those living the gospel of Jesus Christ, hope brings the assurance that God is aware of us and will fulfill His promised blessings according to His will and timing. God’s gift of hope helps us view the experiences of mortal life from an eternal perspective, especially in moments when our faith is tested (see Jeremiah 17:7 ). Jesus Christ is a God of hope, and He makes it possible for us to receive an abundance of hope (see Romans 15:13 ). Hope comes from having faith in our Savior’s love and in His power to rescue and save those who come unto Him.

What Is Hope?

Hope is a divine gift that comes when a person exercises faith in Jesus Christ (see Moroni 7:40–41 ). It brings a feeling of trust that eternal promises will be fulfilled through Him. He is the source of hope and strength for all God’s children (see Joel 3:16 ). Hope provides us with confidence to move forward during the difficulties of mortal life. It is the joyful anticipation of the Resurrection and the promised blessings of salvation and exaltation. Hope leads a person to focus on the needs of others and to serve them with charity.

Topic overview: Hope

Related gospel study guides: Faith in Jesus Christ , Atonement of Jesus Christ , Charity , Gifts of the Spirit , Resurrection

Section 1

Jesus Christ Provides Hope as You Seek to Follow Him

Many of the difficulties we face in this life are a consequence of the Fall of Adam and Eve (see Doctrine and Covenants 29:40 ). Sickness, suffering, sin, and death are part of the mortal experience. If there were no Atonement and Resurrection through Jesus Christ, we would never find healing, forgiveness, joy, or eternal life (see 2 Nephi 9:7–9 ). We would be miserable and hopeless forever (see Mosiah 16:3–4 ).

But Jesus Christ did come to the earth and suffered for every misfortune in our lives (see Alma 7:11 ). He overcame the penalty of sin for all who exercise faith in Him and repent of their sins (see Moses 5:9 ). He broke the bands of death and was resurrected, opening the way for us to live again (see 2 Nephi 2:6–8 ). He promises the hope of eternal life to everyone who will follow Him (see Ether 12:32 ).

Things to think about

Believing in God brings hope and confidence in the reality of the Resurrection and eternal life. Read Ether 12:4 . How can hope that comes through your faith in Jesus Christ serve as an anchor to your soul in your daily life?

In the Book of Mormon, the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi experienced a powerful change when they heard the gospel message and were converted. Read Alma 27:28 . How did the gift of hope and their understanding of Jesus Christ influence their perspective about this life and the next? How might this principle apply in your life?

Activity for learning with others

The death of a family member or friend brings sorrow. Because Jesus Christ has suffered the pains and afflictions of all mankind, we can pray to Heavenly Father in His name and seek His comforting help. The blessing of hope is promised to those who will believe in God’s plan for our resurrection and eternal life. To better understand the importance of hope during a time of loss, invite group members to select and read one of the following: 1 Peter 1:3–5 ; Jacob 4:11 ; Alma 13:27–29 ; Ether 12:32 . You might also watch “ Finding Hope through the Resurrection of Christ ” (4:41). How does the gift of hope bring comfort to those who have lost friends and loved ones? How would you describe the hope that Jesus Christ has made it possible for you and your loved ones to be resurrected and live forever?

Learn more

Proverbs 10:28 ; Lamentations 3:25–26 ; 1 Corinthians 15:19 ; Moroni 9:25–26

“ The Power of Hope ” (video), Gospel Library

Jeffrey R. Holland and Patricia T. Holland, “ A Future Filled with Hope ” (worldwide devotional for young adults, Jan. 8, 2023), Gospel Library

Section 2

Your Faith in Jesus Christ Will Bring You Hope

The scriptures often speak of hope together with the attributes of faith and charity (see Moroni 7:40–44 ). Our efforts to increase our faith in Jesus Christ and to act with charity toward others are directly connected to our capacity to have hope (see Moroni 10:20–21 ). In speaking of the importance of faith, hope, and charity, President Russell M. Nelson explained: “These three attributes are intertwined like strands in a cable and may not always be precisely distinguished. Together they become our tether to the celestial kingdom.”

Hope is one of the blessings we can receive through the Holy Ghost when we repent and are baptized (see Moroni 8:25–26 ). We are promised that when we have “unshaken faith” in Jesus Christ, Heavenly Father will help us obtain a “perfect brightness of hope” ( 2 Nephi 31:19–20 ). We can also receive greater hope when we search the scriptures (see Romans 15:4 ; Jacob 4:6 ).

Things to think about

In speaking to young adults, Sister Patricia Holland taught, “ Faith is the conviction that there is a God, hope is trusting He will help us, and charity is His love and ability working through us to bless others.” How does learning about faith and charity help us better understand hope?

Activity for learning with others

With members of the group, read the following statement by President Dieter F. Uchtdorf:

“The adversary uses despair to bind hearts and minds in suffocating darkness. Despair drains from us all that is vibrant and joyful and leaves behind the empty remnants of what life was meant to be. …

“Hope, on the other hand, is like the beam of sunlight rising up and above the horizon of our present circumstances. It pierces the darkness with a brilliant dawn. It encourages and inspires us to place our trust in the loving care of an eternal Heavenly Father, who has prepared a way for those who seek for eternal truth in a world of relativism, confusion, and of fear.”

What are some ways obtaining the attribute of hope can help us see through the darkness of this world?

Learn more

Alma 7:22–24 ; Ether 12:28 ; Articles of Faith 1:13

Russell M. Nelson, “ A More Excellent Hope ,” Ensign , Feb. 1997, 60–64

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ The Infinite Power of Hope ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2008, 21–24

Other Resources about Hope

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ A More Excellent Hope ,” Ensign , Feb. 1997, 61.

Jeffrey R. Holland and Patricia T. Holland, “ A Future Filled with Hope ” (worldwide devotional for young adults, Jan. 8, 2023), Gospel Library.

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ The Infinite Power of Hope ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2008, 22.
