Jesus Christ Chosen as Savior
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/jesus-christ-chosen-as-savior?lang=eng

“Jesus Christ Chosen as Savior,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Jesus Christ Chosen as Savior

When the plan for our salvation was presented to us in the premortal existence, we were so happy that we “shouted for joy.” We understood that we would have to leave our heavenly home for a time. While we were away, all of us would sin and some of us would lose our way. Our Heavenly Father knew we would need help, so He planned a way to help us.

We needed a Savior to pay for our sins and teach us how to return to our Heavenly Father. Our Father said, “Whom shall I send?” Jesus Christ, who was called Jehovah, said, “Here am I, send me.”

Jesus Christ was willing to come to the earth, give His life for us, and take upon Himself our sins. He, like our Heavenly Father, wanted us to choose whether we would obey Heavenly Father’s commandments . He knew we must be free to choose in order to prove ourselves worthy of exaltation. Jesus said, “Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.”

Satan, who was called Lucifer, also came, saying, “Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor.” Under Satan’s plan, we would not be allowed to choose. He would take away the freedom of choice that our Father had given us. Satan wanted to have all the honor for our salvation. Under his proposal, our purpose in coming to earth would have been frustrated.

After hearing both sons speak, Heavenly Father said, “I will send the first.”

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Gospel Study Guide

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Related Topics

Godhead

Jesus Christ

Notes

Job 38:7 .

Abraham 3:27 .

Abraham 3:27 ; see also Moses 4:1–4 .

Moses 4:2 .

Moses 4:1 .

See Teachings of Presidents of the Church: David O. McKay (2003), 207 .

Abraham 3:27 .
