Jesus Christ
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/jesus-christ-study-guide?lang=eng

“Jesus Christ,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Jesus Christ

The Savior and Redeemer of the world

Many people in this world have heard of Jesus Christ but are not aware of what He has done for them. The message of the restored gospel helps us understand that Jesus Christ was much more than just a historical figure. He is God’s Only Begotten Son, who has done everything to make salvation and eternal life possible for all. When you learn about His role as your Savior and Redeemer, you discover that He can lift your burdens and change your life forever. When you choose to believe in Jesus Christ and trust in His infinite power, you can receive guidance and help with every possible challenge in this life.

Who Is Jesus Christ?

Jesus Christ is the Firstborn and Only Begotten Son of Heavenly Father. In the premortal world, Jesus Christ was chosen to be the Savior of God’s children (see Abraham 3:27 ). Heavenly Father sent Him to this earth to suffer and die for our sins (see John 3:16–17 ). With divine power, Jesus Christ overcame death and was resurrected. He lives today. He has promised to someday return to the earth (see Doctrine and Covenants 133:10–11, 25 ).

Topic overview: Jesus Christ

Related gospel study guides: Godhead , Premortal Life , Creation , Birth of Jesus Christ , Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ , Atonement of Jesus Christ , Resurrection , Second Coming of Jesus Christ , Salvation

Section 1

Jesus Christ Is the Savior and Redeemer of the World

Nothing is more important for us to learn about than Jesus Christ—who He is, what He has done for us, and what He wants us to know and do. The scriptures and the teachings of modern prophets and apostles help us recognize His essential role as our Savior and Redeemer.

We learn in the scriptures that in the premortal world, Jesus Christ was chosen to be the Savior for all Heavenly Father’s children (see 1 Peter 1:19–20 ; Abraham 3:27 ). From the very beginning, Jesus Christ has been the key figure in fulfilling God’s plan for the salvation and exaltation of His children. Under the Father’s direction, Jesus Christ created the heavens and the earth (see Moses 1:32–33 ). During Old Testament times, Jesus Christ was known as the great Jehovah. He guided and directed ancient prophets and believers. His love and mercy strengthened them during their trials.

More than 2,000 years ago, Jesus Christ came to the earth through a miraculous birth. He lived and ministered among people in the land of Israel. He performed mighty miracles, such as healing the sick and raising the dead (see Matthew 11:4–5 ). He established His Church and taught the doctrine of repentance, forgiveness of sins, and eternal life to all who would follow Him. Jesus Christ lived a perfect life, always walking in obedience to His Father (see 2 Nephi 31:7 ).

Because Jesus Christ came to the earth to save the Father’s children, He willingly took upon Himself the penalty for their sins. Centuries earlier, Isaiah had prophesied: “Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. … He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities” ( Isaiah 53:4–5 ). Jesus experienced immense agony, causing Him to bleed from every pore (see Luke 22:44 ; Doctrine and Covenants 19:15–20 ). He was arrested and condemned on false charges and sentenced to die. He was cruelly nailed to a cross, where He suffered and gave His life for us (see Matthew 27:50 ). But His death was not the end. Jesus Christ rose from the grave and ministered to His followers as a resurrected being (see Luke 24:36–40 ; 3 Nephi 11:8–15 ).

Today, members of the Church of Jesus Christ look forward to His promised return to the earth. No one knows when this will occur (see Doctrine and Covenants 49:7 ), but the scriptures speak of signs and events that will precede His Second Coming. The earth will be changed when the Lord returns, and He will reveal all things to those who are righteous (see Doctrine and Covenants 101:23–34 ).

Things to think about

Jesus Christ was chosen by Heavenly Father to carry out His plan for our salvation and exaltation. Read Doctrine and Covenants 38:1–3 and consider the knowledge and power Jesus Christ possessed before He was born on earth. How can knowing the infinite scope of the Lord’s knowledge and power increase your faith and trust in Him today?

Jesus Christ is known by many names and titles. Read the following scripture passages to better understand why Jesus Christ is called Savior ( Acts 4:10–12 ; Helaman 14:15–16 ) and Redeemer ( Titus 2:13–14 ; 2 Nephi 2:6–7, 26 ). Why is it important to know for yourself that Jesus Christ is your Savior and Redeemer?

Activity for learning with others

With your group members, watch the video “ Excerpts from ‘The Living Christ: The Testimony of the Apostles’ ” (2:45), listening for ways the video reminds you to increase your faith in Jesus Christ. You might also invite group members to review the summarized information found at the top of the entry “ Jesus Christ ” in the Guide to the Scriptures (Gospel Library). How can this information help you think about Jesus Christ as your Savior and Redeemer?

Learn more

John 11:25–26 ; Mosiah 3:5–13 ; Abraham 2:7–8

“ The Living Christ: The Testimony of the Apostles ,” Gospel Library

“ Jesus Christ Appears in the Ancient Americas ” (video), youtube.com

Section 2

Come unto Jesus Christ

Heavenly Father has prepared rich blessings for those who receive His Son, Jesus Christ (see Doctrine and Covenants 84:37–38 ). Jesus Christ declared: “If ye will come unto me ye shall have eternal life. Behold, mine arm of mercy is extended towards you, and whosoever will come, him will I receive” ( 3 Nephi 9:14 ). We show our desire to accept the Lord’s invitation to come unto Him when we place our faith in Him, repent of our sins, are baptized, keep God’s commandments, and receive sacred temple ordinances.

When we humbly turn to Jesus Christ in faith and repentance, we can receive a remission of our sins (see Mosiah 4:2–3 ). The Atonement of Jesus Christ also makes it possible for us to “have access to godly power—power sufficient to deal with the burdens, obstacles, and temptations of our day.” The love, mercy, and forgiveness we receive from Jesus Christ can bring about lasting change in our lives and give us the strength to move forward doing God’s will (see Mosiah 5:2 ; Helaman 15:7–8 ).

Things to think about

Jesus Christ took upon Himself our pains and sicknesses so He would know how to support and help us in our own infirmities. Read Alma 7:11–13 and reflect on how Jesus Christ understands your pains and challenges perfectly and knows how to bless and comfort you, even when no one else does. When has the Savior helped you in times of trial or temptation? How can you rely on Him when you need relief?

Activity for learning with others

Jesus Christ has infinite divine power to forgive, lift, and strengthen us. Knowing that can help us face challenges with more hope. President Russell M. Nelson taught:

“Whatever questions or problems you have, the answer is always found in the life and teachings of Jesus Christ. Learn more about His Atonement, His love, His mercy, His doctrine, and His restored gospel of healing and progression. Turn to Him! Follow Him!”

Discuss President Nelson’s statement. Invite group members to identify some of the questions or challenges we face today. Discuss ways we might find solutions through our Savior, Jesus Christ.

Learn more

Matthew 11:28–30 ; Ephesians 5:1–2 ; 2 Nephi 31:16 ; 3 Nephi 27:21 ; Moroni 10:32–33

Neil L. Andersen, “ My Mind Caught Hold upon This Thought of Jesus Christ ,” Liahona , May 2023, 91–94

Sharon Eubank, “ Christ: The Light That Shines in Darkness ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 73–76

Other Resources about Jesus Christ

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

See Topics and Questions, “ Second Coming of Jesus Christ ,” Gospel Library.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Drawing the Power of Jesus Christ into Our Lives ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2017, 39.

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Answer Is Always Jesus Christ ,” Liahona , May 2023, 127.
