Joseph Smith
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/joseph-smith-study-guide?lang=eng

“Joseph Smith,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Joseph Smith

God’s chosen prophet to restore the gospel of Jesus Christ

The Prophet Joseph Smith accomplished incredible things in his short life. As God’s chosen prophet he translated the Book of Mormon “by the gift and power of God” (Introduction to the Book of Mormon), received visions and revelations, and organized the Church of Jesus Christ on the earth. It might sound impossible that one person could do so much. But Joseph had a divine mission to restore the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the Lord prepared a way for him to fulfill His work.

Because of the Prophet Joseph Smith, we know that God loves us and still speaks to us today. We know that He has a plan for His children and has prepared a way for them to live with Him again. And we know that this is “[His] work and [His] glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” ( Moses 1:39 ).

Who Was Joseph Smith?

Joseph Smith Jr. was born in 1805 in Vermont, USA. God called Joseph to be a prophet and to restore the gospel of Jesus Christ in our day. He was the first President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Prophet Joseph Smith received sacred visions and revelations. God the Father and Jesus Christ appeared to him. He received priesthood authority from heavenly messengers and translated the Book of Mormon and other ancient scripture by the gift and power of God. Joseph was often persecuted for his testimony, but he remained true to it to the end of his life, when he and his brother Hyrum were killed by a mob in 1844.

Topic overview: Joseph Smith

Related gospel study guides: Prophets , Restoration of the Gospel , First Vision , Book of Mormon , Restoration of the Priesthood

Section 1

Joseph Smith Was a Devoted Witness of God the Father and Jesus Christ

When Joseph Smith was only 14 years old, he saw God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ (see Joseph Smith—History 1:15–17 ). This event is known as the First Vision and marked the beginning of the Restoration of the gospel. As the Restoration continued to unfold, Joseph witnessed Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ in other visions and testified of Them (see Doctrine and Covenants 76:19–24 ; 137:1–3 ).

Joseph faced many trials and was persecuted for what he knew to be true. But no matter how great his afflictions, he would not deny his witness of God and Jesus Christ or that he had been called to the Lord’s work (see Joseph Smith—History 1:25 ). At the end of his life, the Prophet sealed his testimony with his blood when he was martyred at Carthage Jail (see Doctrine and Covenants 135:1–3 ; see also Saints , 1:542–52 ). His faithfulness to the Lord’s work helped bring the gospel to God’s children on the earth once again (see Doctrine and Covenants 136:37–38 ).

Things to think about

Joseph Smith’s powerful witness of Jesus Christ is recorded in the scriptures. Read his testimony in Doctrine and Covenants 76:22–24 and Doctrine and Covenants 110:1–4 . Reflect on what you learn about Jesus Christ in these verses. Then ponder your own testimony of the Savior (see 2 Nephi 31:18 ). How has the Prophet Joseph Smith’s testimony of Jesus Christ influenced your own? You may also want to record your testimony or other personal experiences that have brought you closer to the Lord.

Activities for learning with others

At 14 years of age, Joseph Smith first witnessed Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ. Learn about this witness by reading Joseph Smith—History 1:14–20 together. What do we learn about God the Father and Jesus Christ from this account? How did the world change because of Joseph’s witness? Share your thoughts and then watch the video “ #HearHim: Listen to the Voice of Jesus Christ ” (1:47) as a group. How do you hear the Savior’s voice? (see also Doctrine and Covenants 6:22–24 ; 8:2–3 ; 9:8–9 ; 11:12–13 ). Discuss your thoughts and then talk about the impact your testimony can have on others as you hear the Savior just as Joseph did.

Joseph’s witness of the Savior is included in “ The Living Christ: The Testimony of the Apostles .” Read the Prophet’s testimony in the declaration together and discuss the historical background for the visions he received. You might also work on memorizing the Prophet’s testimony as a group. Perhaps you could recite the words aloud and use pictures from the Church’s Media Library or create other visuals to help you. Talk about how memorizing the Prophet’s witness can increase your own faith in Jesus Christ and be a source of power, motivation, inspiration, and comfort.

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 135:1–7

M. Russell Ballard, “ Praise to the Man ,” Liahona , Nov. 2023, 74–75

“ Testimony of the Book of Mormon ” (video), Gospel Library

“ The First Vision ,” “ Tutored by Heaven ,” “ Strengthened by Trials ,” “ Sealed His Testimony with His Blood ” (videos), Gospel Library

Section 2

Joseph Smith Was Chosen by God to Restore the Gospel of Jesus Christ

God chose the Prophet Joseph Smith to restore the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ on the earth (see Doctrine and Covenants 1:17 ; 27:13 ; “The Restoration of the Fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: A Bicentennial Proclamation to the World,” Gospel Library). Through the power of God, Joseph translated the Book of Mormon and brought forth additional scriptures (see the introduction to the Book of Mormon ; Doctrine and Covenants 135:3 ). He organized The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, received priesthood authority, and prepared the Saints to establish Zion (see Doctrine and Covenants 20:1 ; Saints , 1:108–9 ).

Because of Joseph Smith’s mission, we know that God has a plan for His children and we can receive ordinances and make covenants with Him in the house of the Lord. Joseph’s work laid the foundation for the gospel of Jesus Christ in the latter days, allowing the Church to move forward under the inspired direction of prophets, seers, and revelators (see Saints , 1:519–20 ).

Things to think about

President Jeffrey R. Holland testified: “I know that Joseph Smith, who acknowledged that he wasn’t perfect, was nevertheless the chosen instrument in God’s hand to restore the everlasting gospel to the earth. I also know that in doing so—particularly through translating the Book of Mormon—he has taught me more of God’s love, of Christ’s divinity, and of priesthood power than any other prophet of whom I have ever read, known, or heard in a lifetime of seeking.” What has the Prophet Joseph Smith taught you about God’s love, Christ’s divinity, and priesthood power through the Restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ? How do those teachings testify to you that Joseph Smith was chosen by God? Record any impressions you may receive.

Activities for learning with others

We enjoy many blessings because God restored the gospel through Joseph Smith. As a group, try creating a list of those blessings. You could start with those mentioned in Doctrine and Covenants 135:3 . These words from President Russell M. Nelson can also give you some ideas: “[The Restoration of the gospel] means that you and your family can be sealed together forever! It means that because you have been baptized by one who has authority from Jesus Christ and have been confirmed a member of His Church, you can enjoy the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost. He will guide and protect you. It means you will never be left comfortless or without access to the power of God to help you. It means that priesthood power can bless you as you receive essential ordinances and make covenants with God and keep them.” Then talk about how you can show your gratitude for what the Lord has given you through His prophet Joseph Smith.

Did you know that another prophet named Joseph, who lived anciently, foresaw Joseph Smith’s mission? Read 2 Nephi 3:6–15 to learn what Joseph of Egypt prophesied about Joseph Smith and his important work. What words are used to describe Joseph Smith in these verses? What did God prepare him to do? Talk with one another about what you find. You could also discuss the blessings promised in this prophecy and how they have come about through the Restoration.

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 21:1–5

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Joseph, the Man and the Prophet ,” Ensign , May 1996, 71–73

Tad R. Callister, “ Joseph Smith—Prophet of the Restoration ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2009, 35–37

“ Ministry of Joseph Smith: The Book of Mormon ,” “ Ministry of Joseph Smith: The Restoration of Priesthood Authority ” (videos), Gospel Library

“ Teachings of Joseph Smith: The Organization of the Church ” (video), Gospel Library

Section 3

You Can Gain Your Own Witness That Joseph Smith Was God’s Prophet

It’s inspiring to think that as a 14-year-old boy, Joseph saw Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ. But what happened before Joseph received the First Vision? He pondered the scriptures, desired wisdom from God, and prayed for His guidance (see Joseph Smith—History 1:10–19 ). Joseph’s story reminds us that we, too, can gain a personal witness of the Savior and His gospel—including that Joseph Smith was called to restore it. While this witness may come over time instead of in one remarkable event, through the Holy Ghost we can know with just as much certainty the truth of all things (see Moroni 10:5 ).

Things to think about

There are many ways we can gain a personal witness that Joseph Smith was a prophet. Elder Neil L. Andersen said: “It may come as you kneel in prayer, asking God to confirm that he was a true prophet. It may come as you read the Prophet’s account of the First Vision. A testimony may distill upon your soul as you read the Book of Mormon again and again. It may come as you bear your own testimony of the Prophet or as you stand in the temple and realize that through Joseph Smith the holy sealing power was restored to the earth.” Think about your testimony of Joseph Smith’s role as God’s prophet. What has helped you believe in his divine calling? What more might you do to gain or strengthen your testimony that he is a prophet?

Activities for learning with others

A personal witness that Joseph Smith was God’s prophet does not just happen to us—it is something we work for. You could strengthen your personal witness of Joseph’s calling by sharing a scripture from the Book of Mormon with your group and talking about how Joseph was an instrument in God’s hands to make that scripture available to us. Perhaps you could also take turns recording the Prophet’s testimony from the Pearl of Great Price together and then listen to it or share it with others. How do the Book of Mormon and Joseph’s testimony strengthen your faith that Joseph was called by God?

We can grow our testimony of Joseph Smith’s divine calling throughout our lives. Perhaps your testimony of his role feels stronger at certain times than at others. You could read together this counsel by President Dieter F. Uchtdorf: “I invite you to step back, look at your life from a higher plane, and simplify your approach to discipleship.” Consider exploring how President Uchtdorf’s counsel applies to your testimony that Joseph was God’s prophet by looking at a picture that is zoomed in on one detail. Talk together about what that image looks like. Then look at the same picture zoomed out so it shows the whole image. How does the picture look different from before? What does this example teach you about how to gain a witness of the Prophet Joseph Smith’s divine calling?

Learn more

Introduction to the Book of Mormon

Neil L. Andersen, “ Joseph Smith ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2014, 28–31

“ The Life and Ministry of Joseph Smith ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 1–24

Joseph Smith: The Prophet of the Restoration (video), Gospel Library

Other Resources about Joseph Smith

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

See Saints: The Story of the Church of Jesus Christ in the Latter Days , vol. 1, The Standard of Truth, 1815–1846 (2018), 384–90 .

See Russell M. Nelson, “ Hear Him ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 88.

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Lord, I Believe ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2013, 95.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Hear Him ,” 88.

Neil L. Andersen, “ Joseph Smith ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2014, 30.

See L. Whitney Clayton, “ Choose to Believe ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2015, 38.

See Neil L. Andersen, “ Joseph Smith ,” 30.

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ It Works Wonderfully! ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2015, 22.
