Judgment
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/judging-others-study-guide?lang=eng

“Judgment,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Judgment

Preparing to meet God

Have you ever considered how understanding the purpose of life and believing in life after death influence your choices and behavior? How is your life affected because you have a knowledge of Heavenly Father’s plan? In the premortal world, Jehovah explained that we would come to earth to be tested and proven “to see if [we would] do all things whatsoever the Lord [our] God [would] command [us]” ( Abraham 3:25 ). Yet no one is always obedient to God’s commandments. That is why Heavenly Father sent His Son to suffer and die for us. Through faith in Jesus Christ and repentance of our sins, we can receive God’s mercy, grace, and forgiveness. The message of the gospel of Jesus Christ is that we can be redeemed and sanctified because of His love and atoning sacrifice and be found worthy to stand with confidence before God on the day of judgment.

What Is Judgment?

After the Resurrection, when our spirits are restored to our immortal bodies, we will stand before the judgment seat of God. That will be when the Lord pronounces our eternal reward based on our actions, our circumstances, and the desires of our hearts. While God is the ultimate Judge of all people, the Holy Ghost can guide us to make personal judgments about ideas, situations, and the role of others in our lives (see Doctrine and Covenants 11:12 ). We become more like Jesus Christ when we love others and refrain from condemning them.

Topic overview: Judgment

Related gospel study guides: Plan of Salvation , Resurrection , Eternal Life , Agency , Obedience , Forgiveness

Section 1

You Will Someday Stand before God to Be Judged

The scriptures teach that following the Resurrection, each of God’s children will stand before Him on the day of judgment (see 2 Nephi 9:12–13, 15, 20–22 ). A record of your life will be presented when “the books [are] opened” on that day (see Revelation 20:12–13 ; Doctrine and Covenants 128:6–7 ). We will be held accountable for our thoughts, words, and deeds (see Mosiah 4:30 ; Alma 12:14 ). Because God comprehends the many difficult circumstances each person faces in this life, He will ensure that His children are judged both on their works and “according to the desire of their hearts” ( Doctrine and Covenants 137:9 ). This Final Judgment will determine the kingdom of glory that our choices have prepared us to inherit in eternity—the celestial, terrestrial, or telestial kingdom (see Doctrine and Covenants 88:20–32 ).

Heavenly Father will administer divine judgment through His Son Jesus Christ (see John 5:21–30 ). The Lord has also declared that some of His servants will assist Him as judges of God’s children (see Matthew 19:28 ; 1 Nephi 12:9–10 ; Mormon 3:18–20 ).

Things to think about

In addition to serving as Judge, Jesus Christ will also serve as our Advocate before God the Father. Read Doctrine and Covenants 45:3–5 , keeping in mind that an advocate is “one who pleads another’s cause” (Bible Dictionary, “ Advocate ”). What qualifies Jesus Christ to plead with the Father on your behalf as your Advocate? What does this passage help you feel about Jesus Christ?

Thinking about the Final Judgment may lead you to feel anxious or discouraged. Read Enos 1:27 and Moroni 10:34 , and consider why some will experience peace and joy on that day. Elder Gerrit W. Gong reminded us: “By divine love and divine law, we are responsible for our choices and their consequences. But our Savior’s atoning love is ‘infinite and eternal.’ When we are ready to come home, even when we are ‘yet a great way off,’ God is ready with great compassion to welcome us, joyfully offering the best He has.” How can remembering and focusing on the Lord’s love and compassion help you prepare for the Final Judgment? Why is it also important to remember that you are responsible for your own choices and their consequences? (see Doctrine and Covenants 101:78 ).

Activity for learning with others

Jesus Christ is the Great Mediator of all God’s children (see 2 Nephi 2:26–28 ). Watch “ The Mediator ” (10:44) as a group. This video is based on a message given by President Boyd K. Packer. Discuss what President Packer’s analogy teaches us about Jesus Christ and His mission to meet the demands of both justice and mercy. How does this message help us better understand the role of Jesus Christ as our Judge (see Moroni 10:34 ) and Advocate (see Doctrine and Covenants 29:5 )?

Learn more

Alma 12:12–15 ; 3 Nephi 27:23–26 ; Mormon 3:20 ; 9:12–14 ; Articles of Faith 1:2

James R. Rasband, “ Ensuring a Righteous Judgment ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 12–14

Section 2

The Gospel of Jesus Christ Prepares You to Meet God

On the day of judgment, we will receive an inheritance in a kingdom of glory. President Dallin H. Oaks taught: “The kingdom of glory we receive in the Final Judgment is determined by the laws we choose to abide by in our Heavenly Father’s loving plan [see Doctrine and Covenants 88:22–24 ]. Under that plan there are multiple kingdoms so that all of His children can be assigned to a kingdom where they can ‘abide.’”

The fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ contains every law we need to follow in this life to inherit the celestial kingdom. When we choose to follow Jesus Christ and live according to His gospel, we are preparing to stand spotless before God at the judgment bar (see 2 Nephi 9:13–15 ; 3 Nephi 27:20–21 ).

Things to think about

Repentance is an essential part of preparing for the Final Judgment. Read Alma 34:31–35 . Why is it essential to not procrastinate repentance? What do you feel will help you “prepare to meet God”?

The Lord has established standards to help measure a person’s spiritual readiness for baptism, ordination to the priesthood, service in a calling, or participation in temple ordinances. When has the opportunity to meet with a priesthood leader helped you increase your personal efforts to live the gospel of Jesus Christ? Why is it appropriate to consider every day to be a day of judgment?

Activity for learning with others

Examining your life is an important way to prepare for the Final Judgment. Invite members of your group to read Alma 5:14–26 and identify questions that can help us consider our spiritual standing before the Lord. Discuss some of the ways Alma invited his people to prepare for the time when they would meet God. In what ways will the Savior help us as we strive to prepare to meet God?

Learn more

2 Nephi 2:26–28 ; Mosiah 4:10–12

Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Challenge to Become ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2000, 32–34

Section 3

The Savior Instructs You to Judge Righteously

We make decisions every day based on our best judgment. When deciding between right and wrong or good and evil, we need the Holy Ghost to guide our decisions (see Doctrine and Covenants 11:12 ). Sometimes we must make decisions about other people and the role they play in our lives, such as choosing our friends or our spouse. In such cases, we should remember the Lord’s instruction to “judge not unrighteously, that ye be not judged; but judge righteous judgment” ( Joseph Smith Translation, Matthew 7:2 [in Matthew 7:1 , footnote a ]).

Criticism, harsh words, and unkind thoughts are never appropriate. “See that you are merciful unto your brethren; deal justly, judge righteously, and do good continually” ( Alma 41:14 ). In moments when judgment is needed in our interactions with others, we should seek to demonstrate our love for God and love for others (see Matthew 22:37–39 ).

Things to think about

President Dallin H. Oaks explained: “There are two kinds of judging: final judgments, which we are forbidden to make, and intermediate judgments, which we are directed to make, but upon righteous principles.” What are some of the “righteous principles” that can help you avoid misjudging others or judging unrighteously?

Activity for learning with others

Display or read the following statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith:

“We [hope that] our brethren will be careful of one another’s feelings, and walk in love, honoring one another more than themselves, as is required by the Lord. …

“If you will put away from your midst all evil speaking, backbiting, and ungenerous thoughts and feelings: humble yourselves, and cultivate every principle of virtue and love, then will the blessings of Jehovah rest upon you, and you will yet see good and glorious days; peace will be within your gates, and prosperity in your borders.”

Discuss how our efforts to refrain from unrighteous judgment and condemning others can bring peace and blessings. When have you felt blessed for striving to judge righteously?

Learn more

Leviticus 19:15–18 ; Matthew 7:1–8 (including the Joseph Smith Translation in verse 1, footnote a , and in the Bible appendix); John 7:24 (see also the Joseph Smith Translation in footnote b )

Russell M. Nelson, “ Peacemakers Needed ,” Liahona , May 2023, 98–101

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Judge Not and Judging ,” Ensign , August 1999, 6–13

Gregory A. Schwitzer, “ Developing Good Judgment and Not Judging Others ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2010, 103–5

Other Resources about Judgment

Scriptures on Last Judgment and on Judge, Judgment

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for teaching children

Notes

Gerrit W. Gong, “ Trust Again ,” Liahona , Nov. 2021, 99.

Boyd K. Packer, “ The Mediator ,” Ensign , May 1977, 54–56.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Divine Love in the Father’s Plan ,” Liahona , May 2022, 102.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ ‘Judge Not’ and Judging ,” Ensign , Aug. 1999, 7.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 344 .
