Judging Others
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/judging-others?lang=eng

Overview

Judging Others

Overview

Judgment is an important use of our agency and requires great care, especially when we make judgments about other people. All our judgments must be guided by righteous standards. Only God, who knows each individual’s heart, can make final judgments of individuals.

Sometimes people feel that it is wrong to judge others in any way. While it is true that we should not condemn others or judge them unrighteously, we will need to make judgments of ideas, situations, and people throughout our lives. The Lord has given many commandments that we cannot keep without making judgments. For example, He has said: “Beware of false prophets. … Ye shall know them by their fruits” ( Matthew 7:15–16 ) and “Go ye out from among the wicked” ( Doctrine and Covenants 38:42 ). We need to make judgments of people in many of our important decisions, such as choosing friends, voting for government leaders, and choosing a spouse.

The Lord gave a warning to guide us in our judgment of others: “With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother: Let me pull the mote out of thine eye—and behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother’s eye” ( 3 Nephi 14:2–5 ).

In this scripture passage the Lord teaches that a fault we see in another is often like a tiny speck in that person’s eye, compared to our own faults, which are like an enormous beam in our eyes. Sometimes we focus on others’ faults when we should instead be working to improve ourselves.

Our righteous judgments about others can provide needed guidance for them and, in some cases, protection for us and our families. We should approach any such judgment with care and compassion. As much as we can, we should judge people’s situations rather than judging the people themselves. Whenever possible, we should refrain from making judgments until we have an adequate knowledge of the facts. And we should always be sensitive to the Holy Spirit, who can guide our decisions. Alma’s counsel to his son Corianton is a helpful reminder: “See that you are merciful unto your brethren; deal justly, judge righteously, and do good continually” ( Alma 41:14 ).

Related Topics

Agency and Accountability

Charity

Forgiveness

Love

Mercy

Scriptures

Scripture References

1 Samuel 16:7

Moroni 7:14–19

Doctrine and Covenants 11:12

Scripture Study Resources

Topical Guide, “ Discernment, Spiritual ,” “ Judgment ,” “ Mercy ,” “ Perceive ,” “ Self-Mastery ,” “ Understanding ”

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Judge, Judgment ”

Messages from Church Leaders

“Judge Not” and Judging

President Dallin H. Oaks

The Weightier Matters of the Law: Judgment, Mercy, and Faith

President James E. Faust

“Judge Not, That Ye Be Not Judged”

President N. Eldon Tanner

I Will Bring the Light of the Gospel into My Home

Jean B. Bingham

Choosing Charity: That Good Part

Bonnie D. Parkin

Additional Messages

Videos

“Judging Others? Stop It!”

“Looking through Windows”

“Judging Others” (ASL)

“Judging Others”

“Judgment”

Learning Resources

General Resources

“ The Sermon on the Mount ,” Jesus the Christ , chapter 17

Church Magazines

Megan Gladwell, “ Surviving the Social Media Highlight Reel ,” New Era , January 2017

Mindy Raye Friedman, “ How Would You React? ” New Era , April 2013

W. Jeffrey Marsh, “ Prophetic Enlightenment on the Sermon on the Mount ,” Ensign , January 1999

Mark D. Chamberlain, “ The Spiritual Hazards of Faultfinding ,” Ensign , August 1996

Paul K. Browning, “ Your Marriage and the Sermon on the Mount ,” Liahona , September 1995

“ Q&A: Questions and Answers ,” New Era , November 1989

Carol Lynn Pearson, “ Judge Not ,” Liahona , June 1984

Kenneth L. Higbee, “ Judge Not ,” Ensign , September 1973

Study Manuals

December 7–13: Moroni 7–9

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: Book of Mormon 2020

February 25–March 3: Matthew 6–7

Come, Follow Me—For Individuals and Families: New Testament 2019

“Matthew 5–7”

New Testament Student Manual, chapter 3

In the News

“ Popular Bullying Video ‘Highly’ Relevant to Many Youth Today ,” Church News

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“Living with Others in Peace and Harmony”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith, chapter 29

“Developing Christlike Attitudes toward Others”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young, chapter 30

“Forgiving Others with All Our Hearts”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Spencer W. Kimball, chapter 9

Stories

Washed Clean

President Boyd K. Packer

Teaching Resources

Teaching Outlines

August 12–18: Romans 7–16

Come, Follow Me—For Primary: New Testament 2019

“Home-Study Lesson: Matthew 6:1–13:23”

New Testament Seminary Teacher Manual, unit 3

“3 Nephi 14”

Book of Mormon Seminary Teacher Manual, lesson 124

Media

Music

“Lord, I Would Follow Thee,” Hymns, no. 220

“Nay, Speak No Ill,” Hymns, no. 233

“Should You Feel Inclined to Censure,” Hymns, no. 235
