Justice and Mercy
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/justice-and-mercy?lang=eng

“Justice and Mercy,” Topics and Questions (2026)

Overview

Justice and Mercy

Justice and mercy are both essential parts of God’s plan for us. We are His children, and He wants us to return to live with Him. But for that to happen, we have to overcome death and sin. God knew we couldn’t do this on our own. So He sent His Son, Jesus Christ , to help us. The Savior overcame all through His Atonement and Resurrection . Because of Him, we can receive eternal life .

The Need for Justice

In the gospel, justice is the law that brings consequences for our actions, both good and bad. For instance, we receive blessings when we obey God’s commandments and when we make and keep sacred covenants .

The law of justice also demands that a penalty be paid when we sin . To meet these demands, Jesus took our place and suffered for our sins so we could repent.

When we truly repent, we receive God’s forgiveness . The prophet Alma taught, “Justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved.” Because of our Savior’s selfless act, the Father can have mercy on us.

Our Need for Mercy

Because we all sin, we need God’s mercy. God shows us mercy by loving us despite our weaknesses and shortcomings and forgiving our sins as we repent.

God’s mercy may seem to conflict with the law of justice, which says that no unclean thing can dwell with Him. But through His atoning power, Jesus Christ fulfilled God’s plan so that God could “be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also.” As we repent, we receive His mercy and can be made clean and worthy to be with God again.

Forgiveness is not the only gift of mercy from Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ—every blessing is a gift of mercy we receive from Them. For example, we receive divine mercy when Heavenly Father hears and answers our prayers, when we are guided by the Holy Ghost, and when we are healed through priesthood power.

Mercy for Others

Jesus Christ taught His followers, “Be ye … merciful, as your Father also is merciful.” We can follow our Heavenly Father’s example of mercy in how we treat others. We can seek ways to be caring, patient, and forgiving, even when others have shortcomings, make mistakes, or hurt our feelings. This can help us to become more like our Savior, Jesus Christ.

Related Topics

Atonement

Charity

Forgiveness

Love

Plan of Salvation

Related Content

Scriptures: Mercy and Justice

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

See Alma 42:12–15 .

Alma 42:24 ; see also Alma 42:22–23, 25 .

See 1 Nephi 10:21 .

Alma 42:15 .

Luke 6:36 .
