Kingdoms of Glory
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/kingdoms-of-glory?lang=eng

“Kingdoms of Glory,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Kingdoms of Glory

Through the Atonement of Jesus Christ, all people will be resurrected . After we are resurrected, we will stand before the Lord to be judged according to our desires and actions. Each of us will accordingly receive an eternal dwelling place in a specific kingdom of glory. The Lord taught this principle when He said, “In my Father’s house are many mansions.” 1

There are three kingdoms of glory: the celestial kingdom, the terrestrial kingdom, and the telestial kingdom. The glory we inherit will depend on the depth of our conversion, expressed by our obedience to the Lord’s commandments. It will depend on the manner in which we have “received the testimony of Jesus.” 2

Celestial Kingdom

The celestial kingdom is the highest of the three kingdoms of glory. Those in this kingdom will dwell forever in the presence of God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ . This should be your goal: to inherit celestial glory and to help others receive that great blessing as well. Such a goal is not achieved in one attempt; it is the result of a lifetime of righteousness and constancy of purpose.

The celestial kingdom is the place prepared for those who have “received the testimony of Jesus” and been “made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood.” 3 To inherit this gift, we must receive the ordinances of salvation, keep the commandments , and repent of our sins. 4

In January 1836 the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation that expanded his understanding of the requirements to inherit celestial glory. The heavens were opened to him, and he saw the celestial kingdom. He marveled when he saw his older brother Alvin there, even though Alvin had died before receiving the ordinance of baptism . 5 Then the voice of the Lord came to the Prophet Joseph:

“All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God;

“Also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom;

“For I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.” 6

Commenting on this revelation, the Prophet Joseph said, “I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven.” 7

From another revelation to the Prophet Joseph, we learn that there are three degrees within the celestial kingdom. To be exalted in the highest degree and continue eternally in family relationships, we must enter into “the new and everlasting covenant of marriage” and be true to that covenant. In other words, temple marriage is a requirement for obtaining the highest degree of celestial glory. 8 All who are worthy to enter into the new and everlasting covenant of marriage will have that opportunity, whether in this life or the next.

Terrestrial Kingdom

Those who inherit terrestrial glory will “receive of the presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of the Father. Wherefore, they are bodies terrestrial, and not bodies celestial, and differ in glory as the moon differs from the sun.” 9 Generally speaking, individuals in the terrestrial kingdom will be honorable people “who were blinded by the craftiness of men.” 10 This group will include members of the Church who were “not valiant in the testimony of Jesus.” 11

Telestial Kingdom

Telestial glory will be reserved for individuals who “received not the gospel of Christ, neither the testimony of Jesus.” 12 These individuals will receive their glory after being redeemed from spirit prison, which is sometimes called hell. 13

Perdition

Some people will not be worthy to dwell in any kingdom of glory. They will be called “the sons of perdition” and will have to “abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory.” 14 This will be the state of “those who know [God’s] power, and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy [God’s] power.” 15

Related Topics

Plan of Salvation

Postmortality

Related Content

Scriptures

Notes

John 14:2 .

Doctrine and Covenants 76:51 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 76:74, 79, 101 .

Doctrine and Covenants 76:51, 69 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 76:50–70 ; 76:92–96 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 137:1–6 .

Doctrine and Covenants 137:7–9 .

Doctrine and Covenants 137:10 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 131:1–4 .

Doctrine and Covenants 76:77–78 .

Doctrine and Covenants 76:75 .

Doctrine and Covenants 76:79 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 76:71–80, 91, 97 .

Doctrine and Covenants 76:82 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 76:84 ; Doctrine and Covenants 76:106 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 76:81–90, 98–106, 109–112 .

Doctrine and Covenants 76:32 ; 88:24 .

Doctrine and Covenants 76:31 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 76:30, 32–49 .
