Melchizedek Priesthood
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/melchizedek-priesthood-study-guide?lang=eng

“Melchizedek Priesthood,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Melchizedek Priesthood

The power and authority of God to bless His children

Heavenly Father is ready to help you obtain spiritual power and guidance on your path to eternal life. God’s priesthood authority makes access to these blessings possible for all God’s children who choose to come unto Him. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: “The Melchizedek Priesthood … is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven.” Through the power of the Melchizedek Priesthood, all God’s sons and daughters can make covenants and receive ordinances that help them become like Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ (see Doctrine and Covenants 76:52–60 ; 84:19–22 ).

What Is the Melchizedek Priesthood?

The priesthood is the eternal power and authority by which God created and governs the heavens and the earth. There are two priesthoods in the Church of Jesus Christ: the Aaronic and the Melchizedek. The Melchizedek Priesthood is the higher or greater priesthood and has always been bestowed upon God’s servants when the fulness of the gospel existed on the earth. Through priesthood keys and delegated priesthood authority, God’s servants are authorized to preach the gospel, administer the ordinances of salvation and exaltation, and govern God’s kingdom on the earth.

Topic overview: Melchizedek Priesthood

Related gospel study guides: Aaronic Priesthood , Priesthood Keys , Restoration of the Priesthood

Section 1

God Delegates Priesthood Authority and Power to His Servants

Throughout history, God has delegated priesthood authority to His servants to act in His name and assist with the salvation and exaltation of His children. Joseph Smith taught, “All the prophets had the Melchizedek Priesthood.”

Anciently, the priesthood was called “ the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God . But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of [the Lord’s] name,” the priesthood was called the “Melchizedek Priesthood” ( Doctrine and Covenants 107:3–4 ). Melchizedek was a righteous high priest and prophet during Old Testament times. In Hebrew, the name Melchizedek means “king of righteousness” (Guide to the Scriptures, “ Melchizedek ,” Gospel Library).

In the New Testament, we learn that Jesus ordained His disciples and gave them priesthood authority (see Luke 9:1–2 ; John 15:16 ; Hebrews 5:1–10 ). On the Mount of Transfiguration, Peter, James, and John received priesthood keys. With those keys, the Apostles had the authority to continue the work of Christ’s Church after His Ascension (see Guide to the Scriptures, “ Transfiguration ,” Gospel Library; see also Matthew 16:15–19 ; 17:1–9 ; Acts 1:21–26 ; Ephesians 4:11–13 ).

In the centuries following the death of the Lord’s Apostles, priesthood authority was lost from the earth. In our day, the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored through Peter, James, and John to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery (see Doctrine and Covenants 27:12–13 ; Joseph Smith—History 1:72 ). Later, other heavenly messengers committed priesthood keys upon them in the Kirtland Temple in Ohio, USA (see Doctrine and Covenants 110:11–16 ).

Things to think about

President Dallin H. Oaks declared, “The priesthood is a divine power and authority held in trust to be used for God’s work for the benefit of all of His children. Priesthood is not those who have been ordained to a priesthood office or those who exercise its authority. Men who hold the priesthood are not the priesthood. While we should not refer to ordained men as the priesthood, it is appropriate to refer to them as holders of the priesthood. Why is it important to distinguish between the priesthood and holders of the priesthood?

Activity for learning with others

President Gordon B. Hinckley stated, “The priesthood is here. … We know, for we have seen, the power of this priesthood. We have seen the sick healed, the lame made to walk, and the coming of light and knowledge and understanding to those who have been in darkness.” What evidences have you seen that God’s priesthood power and authority are operating in the Church of Jesus Christ in our day?

Learn more

Alma 13:14–19 ; Doctrine and Covenants 84:23–26 ; 107:2–8, 18, 42–52

“ Chapter 8: The Everlasting Priesthood ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 101–13

Section 2

Through the Covenants and Ordinances of the Melchizedek Priesthood, You Can Prepare to Return to God’s Presence

President Brigham Young taught, “The Gospel and the Priesthood are the means [God] employs to save and exalt his obedient children to the possession with him of the same glory and power to be crowned with crowns of glory, immortality and eternal lives.” Under the direction of those holding the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, we can make covenants with God and receive sacred ordinances needed to receive eternal life.

Things to think about

When a man receives the Melchizedek Priesthood and is ordained to an office in the priesthood, he enters into “the oath and covenant of the priesthood.” Read Doctrine and Covenants 84:33–44 . What are the things a priesthood holder covenants to do? What divine promise does God make to those who receive and magnify their calling?

Activity for learning with others

Invite your group members to read Doctrine and Covenants 84:17–22 and discuss what the Lord revealed about the priesthood. To clarify the meaning of the passage, consider sharing that the “mysteries of the kingdom” are “spiritual truths known only by revelation” (Guide to the Scriptures, “ Mysteries of God ,” Gospel Library). It may also be helpful to explain that the power of godliness is the power of righteousness, by which we come to know God and become like Him (see Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah [1978], 589). In what ways can sacred ordinances lead us to understand God and prepare us to become more like Him?

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 110:11–16

Henry B. Eyring, “ Families under Covenant ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2012, 62–65

Kent F. Richards, “ The Power of Godliness ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2016, 118–20

Julie B. Beck, “ An Outpouring of Blessings ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2006, 11–13

“ The Holy Priesthood—for the Blessing of God’s Children ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: George Albert Smith (2011), 45–56

Section 3

Both Women and Men Serve in Christ’s Church with Priesthood Authority and Power

God calls both women and men in His Church to assist with the essential work of salvation and exaltation. While only men are ordained to priesthood offices, access to priesthood authority and power is available to both women and men to help them accomplish God’s work. Power in the priesthood is received individually as Church members righteously keep their covenants with the Lord. Under the direction of one who holds priesthood keys, individuals are set apart to function in Church callings. By the laying on of hands, she or he receives priesthood authority to perform the assigned duties. (See Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Keys and Authority of the Priesthood ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2014, 50–51).

Things to think about

President M. Russell Ballard taught: “Our Father in Heaven is generous with His power. All men and all women have access to this power for help in their lives. All who have made sacred covenants with the Lord and who honor those covenants are eligible to receive personal revelation, to be blessed by the ministering of angels, to commune with God, to receive the fulness of the gospel, and, ultimately, to become heirs alongside Jesus Christ of all our Father has.” Why is it important to recognize that sacred blessings are not dependent upon a person being ordained to a priesthood office?

Activities for learning with others

With your group members, read the following statement by President Russell M. Nelson:

“Every woman and every man who makes covenants with God and keeps those covenants, and who participates worthily in priesthood ordinances, has direct access to the power of God. Those who are endowed in the house of the Lord receive a gift of God’s priesthood power by virtue of their covenant, along with a gift of knowledge to know how to draw upon that power.

“The heavens are just as open to women who are endowed with God’s power flowing from their priesthood covenants as they are to men who bear the priesthood.”

Discuss how any worthy member of the Church can draw upon God’s power.

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 25 ; 121:34–37, 41–46

Russell M. Nelson, “ Spiritual Treasures ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2019, 76–79

Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Keys and Authority of the Priesthood ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2014, 49–52

Jean B. Bingham, “ United in Accomplishing God’s Work ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 60–63

Other Resources about the Melchizedek Priesthood

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 108 .

Teachings: Joseph Smith , 109 .

Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Melchizedek Priesthood and the Keys ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 69.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Gordon B. Hinckley (2016), 214 .

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young (1997), 18 .

M. Russell Ballard, “ Men and Women in the Work of the Lord ,” New Era , Apr. 2014, 4–5.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Spiritual Treasures ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2019, 77.
