Membership Councils
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/membership-councils?lang=eng

“Membership Councils,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Membership Councils

Our Heavenly Father loves each of us and wants us to return to live with Him. Because we all sin , He has given us the gift of repentance , which is “the key to happiness and peace of mind. … When we choose to repent, we choose to … grow spiritually and receive joy.” 1

Most repentance takes place between an individual, a loving God, and those who have been affected by a person’s sins. However, if a Church member commits a serious sin, the bishop or stake president may need to assist him or her in repentance. 2

As part of his or her repentance for a serious sin, a member may lose some Church membership privileges for a time. Decisions about membership and membership privileges are sometimes made in a membership council. The purposes of Church membership councils are to help protect others, help a person access the redeeming power of Jesus Christ through repentance, 3 and protect the integrity of the Church.

In a membership council, the bishop or stake president determines through counsel and a spirit of love and inspiration from the Lord if the person remains in good standing or if a person’s Church membership should be restricted or withdrawn.

Restricting or withdrawing a person’s membership is not intended to punish. Rather, these actions are to help a person repent and experience a change of heart. They also give a person time to prepare spiritually to renew and keep his or her covenants again. As a person repents, he or she may be strengthened and find support by attending Church services and activities. When a person has sincerely repented, he or she may have all the privileges of Church membership restored.

For more information about Church membership councils, see General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , chapter 32 , ChurchofJesusChrist.org .

Related Content

Messages from Church leaders

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ We Can Do Better and Be Better ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 67.

See Mosiah 26:29 .

See Alma 26:13 .
