Miracles
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/miracles-study-guide?lang=eng

“Miracles,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Miracles

Manifestations of God’s power and love

What are some of the reasons why you believe God is real and that He is aware of you? Can you think of times when you knew He was demonstrating His love for you? President Russell M. Nelson taught, “Pray to have eyes to see God’s hand in your life and in the world around you.” Miracles represent moments when God works with His power on behalf of His children.

In the scriptures, we learn of mighty miracles that the Great Jehovah performed for His people in the Old Testament. We also learn of miracles performed by Jesus Christ during His mortal life in the New Testament and as the resurrected Lord in the Book of Mormon. But the greatest of all miracles was His Atonement, when He redeemed the world from sin and was resurrected from the dead. Today we can see His works and miracles, both large and small, in our own lives and learn that “the Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works” ( Psalm 145:9 ).

What Is a Miracle?

A miracle is a manifestation of divine power. Miracles are an important part of the work of Jesus Christ, both in ancient times and today.

Topic overview: Miracles

Related gospel study guides: Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ , Prayer , Faith in Jesus Christ , Priesthood Blessings

Section 1

Jesus Christ Is a God of Miracles

Miracles have always been a part of God’s work among His children. The Old and New Testaments include many accounts of Jesus Christ demonstrating divine power in behalf of Heavenly Father’s children. Followers of Jesus Christ today recognize that God’s hand continues to be made manifest in miraculous ways in His Church and in the lives of individuals and families. God declared, “For behold, I am God; and I am a God of miracles; and I will show unto the world that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and I work not among the children of men save it be according to their faith” ( 2 Nephi 27:23 ).

Things to think about

When two of John the Baptist’s disciples asked Jesus, “Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?” Jesus cited examples to show who He was (see Matthew 11:3–6 ). Why did these examples prove who He was? Also consider what Jesus said in John 5:36 . What was the purpose of the “works” Jesus did?

Elder Ronald A. Rasband taught, “The Lord performs miracles to remind us of His power, His love for us, His reach from the heavens to our mortal experience, and His desire to teach of that which is of most worth.” What are some of your favorite miracles you’ve read about in the scriptures? What have these miracles taught you about God?

Activity for learning with others

Invite group members to each choose one of the following accounts of the Savior’s miracles from the New Testament. Identify the “who, what, where, when, and why” of the miracle described in the selected passage. Discuss the similarities and differences between these events. How can these accounts be used to strengthen the faith of people you know?

The healing of two blind men (see Mathew 9:27–31 )

The raising of the widow’s son (see Luke 7:11–16 )

The healing of the man born blind (see John 9 )

The raising of Lazarus (see John 11:1–45 )

Learn more

1 Kings 17:8–24 ; Matthew 4:23 ; John 2:23 ; Mosiah 3:5–11 ; 3 Nephi 17:6–9

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Miracles ,” Ensign , June 2001, 6–17

Section 2

Miracles Come through Faith in Jesus Christ

In the New Testament, Jesus promised His disciples that miraculous “signs shall follow them that believe” ( Mark 16:17–18 ). In the latter days He said, “Therefore, as I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that every soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost. And … signs shall follow them that believe” ( Doctrine and Covenants 84:64–65 ). For those who believe in God and Jesus Christ, miracles are a very real possibility, but they must have faith first (see Ether 12:12–18 ).

But we shouldn’t seek miracles as a way to build or prove our faith. The Lord told Joseph Smith: “Faith cometh not by signs, but signs follow those that believe. Yea, signs come by faith, not by the will of men, nor as they please, but by the will of God” ( Doctrine and Covenants 63:9–10 ). The prophet Moroni wrote, “Ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith” ( Ether 12:6 ). A testimony that begins with witnessing a miracle will not last if it’s not nourished with continued faith and obedience.

Some miracles take place quietly, such as when a person gains a testimony of God’s truth, experiences a mighty change of heart, obtains forgiveness from the Lord, or is blessed with peace and strength during a difficult time (see Alma 37:6–7 ).

Things to think about

Consider what the angel told Mary: “For with God nothing shall be impossible” ( Luke 1:37 ). Have you ever faced something that seemed impossible to accomplish or resolve? How can studying scriptural accounts of miracles performed by God’s power prepare you to turn to Him and trust in His love, mercy, and will?

Activity for learning with others

President Howard W. Hunter spoke of the many awe-inspiring miracles performed by Jesus Christ. Then he shared:

“It is most remarkable to witness one who is deaf made to hear again. But surely that great blessing is no more startling than the wondrous combination of bones and skin and nerves that lets our ears receive the beautiful world of sound. Should we not stand in awe of the blessing of hearing and give glory to God for that miracle, even as we do when hearing is restored after it has been lost?

“Is it not the same for the return of one’s sight or the utterance of our speech, or even that greatest miracle of all—the restoration of life? The original creations of the Father constitute a truly wonder-filled world. Are not the greatest miracles the fact that we have life and limb and sight and speech in the first place?”

How can this perspective of the many miracles in our lives increase our gratitude for the God of miracles?

Learn more

Mark 6:5–6 ; Acts 3:1–11 ; Alma 23:6 ; 4 Nephi 1:5

Howard W. Hunter, “ The God That Doest Wonders ,” Ensign , May 1989, 15–17

Michael A. Dunn, “ How to Invite Miracles into Your Life ,” YA Weekly , June 2021, Gospel Library

Section 3

Seek and Expect Miracles in Your Life

There will always be miracles as long as there are people of faith (see Moroni 7:27–29 ). President Russell M. Nelson has taught that we should “seek and expect miracles.” “The Lord will bless you with miracles if you believe in Him, ‘doubting nothing’ [ Mormon 9:21 ]. Do the spiritual work to seek miracles. Prayerfully ask God to help you exercise that kind of faith.”

Miracles are around us every day. Elder Ronald A. Rasband explained: “Many of you have witnessed miracles, more than you realize. They may seem small in comparison to Jesus raising the dead. But the magnitude does not distinguish a miracle, only that it came from God.”

Things to think about

Consider President Nelson’s counsel. What does it mean to “seek” miracles in your life? What is the “spiritual work” you need to do to “seek miracles”? How might you be blessed by looking for ways God is working in your life?

Read Mormon 9:7–21 . If God is unchangeable and bestowed visions, blessings, and revelations upon His children anciently, what does this mean for you? Whom do you know that could benefit from better understanding that “God has not ceased to be a God of miracles”? ( Mormon 9:15 )

Activity for learning with others

Invite group members to share a time when they witnessed God’s hand working a blessing or miracle in their own lives, as appropriate. Discuss the different ways these miracles occurred and the different purposes they served.

Learn more

2 Nephi 28:3–6 ; 3 Nephi 29:6–7 ; Moroni 7:27–37 ; Doctrine and Covenants 35:8

Donald L. Hallstrom, “ Has the Day of Miracles Ceased? ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 88–90

Sydney S. Reynolds, “ A God of Miracles ,” Ensign , May 2001, 12–13

Other Resources about Miracles

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Videos

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ Come, Follow Me ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 90.

Ronald A. Rasband, “ Behold! I Am a God of Miracles ,” Liahona , May 2021, 111.

Howard W. Hunter, “ The God That Doest Wonders ,” Ensign , May 1989, 16.

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Power of Spiritual Momentum ,” Liahona , May 2022, 99–100.

Ronald A. Rasband, “ Behold! I Am a God of Miracles ,” Liahona , May 2021, 111.
