Inviting All to Receive the Gospel
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/missionary-work-study-guide?lang=eng

“Inviting All to Receive the Gospel,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Inviting All to Receive the Gospel

How we lovingly invite God’s children to receive His blessings

Imagine you are walking a path with a friend. The road is dark, but you have a flashlight to make the way bright. You could use the flashlight just to make it easier for you to see what lies ahead. But because you want your friend’s journey to be easier, you also share your light with them.

We invite all to receive the gospel of Jesus Christ for the same reason: the gospel makes our journey through life bright. It answers questions of the soul and gives us perspective, peace, and joy. So we share it with God’s children because we love them and want all to benefit from His light (see 3 Nephi 18:24 ).

What Does It Mean to Invite All to Receive the Gospel of Jesus Christ?

As Latter-day Saints, we strive to invite all to receive the gospel of Jesus Christ because it is a “gospel of peace, and [is] glad tidings of good things” ( Romans 10:15 ). We invite others to receive the gospel “by word and by example.” This can look like sharing the gospel in everyday life, serving as missionaries, and “helping new and returning Church members progress along the covenant path.” When we help others “receive the restored gospel through faith in Jesus Christ and His Atonement, repentance, baptism, receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, and enduring to the end,” we can experience true joy.

Topic overview: Missionary Work

Related gospel study guides: Church of Jesus Christ , Conversion , Everlasting Covenant , Gathering of Israel

Section 1

We Help God Accomplish His Work When We Invite All to Receive the Gospel of Jesus Christ

God wants all His children to hear the gospel of Jesus Christ so all can receive its blessings. One way the Lord brings His gospel to others is by calling us to “declare his word among his people” ( 3 Nephi 5:13 ). We feel joy as we share His word, giving others the opportunity to come unto Jesus Christ and feel His comfort, hope, and peace.

Things to think about

Each soul is precious to God. He wants all of us to return to Him. Read Doctrine and Covenants 18:10–16 , and consider the worth of God’s children. Why does the Lord want you to share the gospel with others? Think about someone who has shared the gospel with you or who has helped you come unto Christ. How would your life be different if that person had not shared the Savior’s light with you? Record your impressions and then write down how you can share His word with others.

We succeed at sharing the gospel when we invite others to learn about it or to simply come and see what it is about. They might accept our invitation—or they might not. Read the section called “Share Your Story” in Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf’s message “ Your Great Adventure .” Consider who you might invite to learn about the gospel or who you might invite again. How can you show your love and respect for that person as you invite them? How could this help them feel the Savior’s love for them?

Activities for learning with others

When we share the gospel of Jesus Christ, it’s important to connect with others in a way that they want or need. Read together some ideas for how to do this in “Find People Where They Are” in chapter 9 of Preach My Gospel: A Guide to Sharing the Gospel of Jesus Christ . Talk about the questions and ideas in this section and brainstorm others. Then role-play a conversation in which you invite someone to learn about the gospel. Afterward, apply these principles to your own life as you invite others to come unto Christ.

Read Doctrine and Covenants 4 together, and talk about who is called to share the gospel of Jesus Christ (see verse 3 ). Then discuss the Christlike attributes listed in verses 5–6 and how they can help us share His word. You might play a game together to help you remember these attributes. Start by tossing a ball to someone in your group. When that person catches the ball, have them name one of the attributes you discussed. Continue with the game until all the attributes have been mentioned. You could play multiple rounds and see if you can get faster each time. Choose one attribute to work on, and observe over time how it helps you invite others to receive the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Learn more

Mark 16:15 ; John 4:35–38

M. Russell Ballard, “ The Essential Role of Member Missionary Work ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2003, 37–40

D. Todd Christofferson, “ Sharing the Message of the Restoration and the Resurrection ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 110–13

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Missionary Work ,” Gospel Library

Section 2

We Can Help Others Receive the Gospel of Jesus Christ as We Love, Share, and Invite

As members of the Church, we want everyone to receive the gospel of Jesus Christ “because we love God and His children” and we want others to feel the same joy that we do. Bringing the gospel to others is simple—we just need to love, share, and invite. Sometimes we do this through missionary service in the Church. Most often, we love, share, and invite by living the principles of the gospel and talking about our faith in normal and natural ways. As we share the gospel with people everywhere, we help prepare God’s children for eternal life.

Things to think about

Sometimes we might want to share the gospel of Jesus Christ but aren’t sure where to start. Review Elder Gary E. Stevenson’s message “ Love, Share, Invite ” for inspiration about how to share the gospel in normal and natural ways. Then read Matthew 7:7 and 3 Nephi 18:20 and ponder how you could ask for the Lord’s help in sharing His gospel with others, including your friends, neighbors, and loved ones. Pray for His guidance, and then look for missionary opportunities. Record how you see the Lord’s hand as you lovingly invite others to learn about His gospel.

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we have the opportunity to serve as missionaries. Read “ Preaching the Gospel of Peace ” by President Russell M. Nelson and “ How Great Will Be Your Joy ” by Elder Ronald A. Rasband. Why does the Lord need missionaries of all ages to bring His gospel to others? How does He bless them for their efforts? Consider how you have seen missionaries follow the principles of loving, sharing, and inviting to help others come unto Christ. What can you do to follow their example? You might also ponder if you could serve a mission and start preparing for the opportunity.

Activities for learning with others

In his message “ Missionary Work: Sharing What Is in Your Heart ,” Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf gave five simple suggestions for sharing the gospel. Review these suggestions together, and talk about how we can put them into practice in our own lives. You might also watch “ Simple Ways to Love, Share, and Invite ” or “ Simple Ways to Love, Share, and Invite for Youth ” and discuss how we can share the gospel with others in natural ways. As you are inspired, practice these principles by naturally sharing the gospel in your daily life. You could meet again to talk about your efforts and what you learned about missionary work in the process.

Serving a mission can be a life-changing opportunity. Read “ Missionary Service Blessed My Life Forever ” by President M. Russell Ballard to learn about some of the blessings that come from missionary service. If you have served a mission, consider sharing how your service blessed your life. Then discuss how members of the Church have the opportunity to love, share, and invite as full-time missionaries, service missionaries, and senior missionaries, and talk about their various responsibilities. You might also sing “ I’ll Go Where You Want Me to Go ” together and discuss how the Lord will help us love, share, and invite wherever He asks us to serve (see 1 Nephi 3:7 ).

Learn more

Matthew 5:14–16 ; Romans 1:16 ; Doctrine and Covenants 33:5–9

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Sharing the Restored Gospel ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2016, 57–60

Gary E. Stevenson, “ Nourishing and Bearing Your Testimony ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 111–14

Neil L. Andersen, “ It’s a Miracle ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2013, 77–80

Share.ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Sharing the Gospel resources in Gospel Library

Other Resources about Inviting All to Receive the Gospel of Jesus Christ

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Missionary Work ,” Gospel Library.

General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 1.2.3 , Gospel Library.

Preach My Gospel: A Guide to Sharing the Gospel of Jesus Christ (2023), 1 .

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ Your Great Adventure ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2019, 88–89.

Preach My Gospel , 171–72 .

General Handbook , 23.1.2 .

See Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ Missionary Work: Sharing What Is in Your Heart ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 17.

See General Handbook , 23.1.3 .

Hymns , no. 270 .
