Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/mortal-ministry-of-jesus-christ-study-guide?lang=eng

“Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ

“And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God” ( Mosiah 3:8 )

The greatest of Heavenly Father’s spirit children is His Firstborn Son, Jesus Christ. Before His mortal birth, Jesus was known by many titles, such as the Great Jehovah and the Lord Omnipotent. God the Father sent His Son to live on earth and offer Himself as an infinite atoning sacrifice to make redemption possible for all God’s children. During His mortal life, Jesus Christ taught His gospel, worked mighty miracles, and established His Church. From the scriptural accounts of His life, we learn that He was perfectly obedient to His Father. Jesus Christ healed the sick and afflicted, offered hope to those who suffered, taught the importance of repentance, and made forgiveness possible. His mortal life set a perfect example for all Heavenly Father’s children to follow.

What Is the Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ?

The Father sent His Beloved Son, Jesus Christ, to the earth to be the Savior and Redeemer of the world. Through His mortal experiences and His atoning sacrifice, He came to know and understand perfectly what each of us experiences here on earth. Jesus Christ provided a perfect example for us to follow.

Topic overview: Jesus Christ

Related gospel study guides: Atonement of Jesus Christ , Birth of Jesus Christ , Jesus Christ , Resurrection

Section 1

Jesus Christ Always Did His Father’s Will

The miraculous events surrounding the birth of Jesus Christ are well documented in the scriptures (see, for example, Luke 2:1–19 ). Regarding His childhood, the scriptures share only that “the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him” and that “Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man” ( Luke 2:40, 52 ).

When Jesus was 12 years old, He traveled with His family to Jerusalem to commemorate the Feast of Passover. On their way home to Nazareth, Mary and Joseph realized Jesus was not among the family members traveling with them. They eventually located Him at the temple in Jerusalem, teaching people and answering their questions (see Joseph Smith Translation, Luke 2:46 [in Luke 2:46 , footnote c ]). When Mary expressed concern over His absence, Jesus said, “How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father’s business?” ( Luke 2:49 ). Even as a boy, Jesus was focused on doing His Father’s work.

Throughout His mortal life, Jesus loved and served God the Father. He said, “I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me” ( John 6:38 ). Jesus Christ wants each of us to do the same. He promised that “he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven” is the person that shall enter God’s kingdom ( Matthew 7:21 ).

Things to think about

Read John 8:25–30 , where Jesus Christ explained, “I do always those things that please [the Father]” ( verse 29 ). What can you do to better understand and follow the Father’s will in your life?

Activity for learning with others

Invite your group members to read and reflect on the questions posed by President Russell M. Nelson in the following statement:

“Are you willing to let God prevail in your life? Are you willing to let God be the most important influence in your life? Will you allow His words, His commandments, and His covenants to influence what you do each day? Will you allow His voice to take priority over any other? Are you willing to let whatever He needs you to do take precedence over every other ambition? Are you willing to have your will swallowed up in His?”

How can your answers to these questions lead you to follow the Savior’s example of always doing the Father’s will?

Learn more

Luke 22:42 ; Mosiah 15:7

“ Chapter 24: Reflections on the Mission of Jesus Christ ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Lorenzo Snow (2012), 277–84

Section 2

Jesus Christ’s Perfect Life Is an Example for All

Near the beginning of His public ministry, Jesus came to John the Baptist and was baptized in the Jordan River. Although He never sinned, Jesus explained that He needed to be baptized “to fulfil all righteousness.” When Jesus came out of the water, the voice of God the Father was heard, saying, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” The Holy Ghost descended upon Jesus, as shown by the sign of the dove. (See Matthew 3:13–17 .)

Jesus Christ led a perfect life. Following His baptism, He fasted for 40 days and 40 nights to commune with God (see Joseph Smith Translation, Matthew 4:2 [in Matthew 4:2 , footnote c ]). Afterward, Satan came tempting Him. Yet Jesus Christ firmly withstood the temptations. His sinless life prepared Jesus Christ to make Himself a sacrifice for all the sins of God’s children. As the only perfect being among God’s children, Jesus Christ is the ultimate example for each of us in our efforts to follow God (see 1 Peter 2:21–22 ).

Things to think about

Read Matthew 4:1–11 , including the Joseph Smith Translation footnotes, which describes what happened when Satan tried to tempt Jesus. What can you learn from Christ’s example for dealing with temptation? In what ways can fasting, prayer, and a knowledge of the scriptures prepare you to overcome temptation?

The resurrected Jesus Christ taught the twelve Nephite disciples about their role as judges of the people. Read 3 Nephi 27:27 to see the commandment Jesus Christ gave His disciples. Why is it important for followers of Jesus Christ to be like Him?

Activity for learning with others

Ask your group members to consider why it was necessary for Jesus Christ to experience temptation. Invite them to look for answers in Hebrews 2:17–18 ; 4:15–16 . Why is it important for us to understand that Jesus Christ experienced temptations just as we do today?

Learn more

John 14:6 ; 2 Nephi 31:4–10 ; Doctrine and Covenants 93:12–20

“ Chapter 1: Jesus Christ—Our Only Way to Hope and Joy ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Howard W. Hunter (2015), 39–48

Section 3

Jesus Taught Us to Love and Serve Each Other

Jesus Christ taught that there are two great commandments. The first of these commandments is to love God with all our heart, soul, and mind. The second is to love others as we love ourselves. (See Matthew 22:36–39 .) Jesus taught these truths frequently in sermons and parables (for example, see Matthew 25:31–46 ; Luke 10:25–37 ).

Jesus Christ was always an example of how to follow God and love others. He personally demonstrated His love and compassion for others as He ministered with great power among God’s children, healing the sick and performing many mighty miracles (see Matthew 11:4–5 ; Mosiah 3:5–6 ).

An important part of Christ’s mortal ministry was to establish His Church. In doing so, He called twelve disciples, authorized them to preach the gospel, and gave them power to heal the sick (see Matthew 10:1–8 ). These disciples carried on the Lord’s work following His death and Resurrection when they taught repentance and invited others to be baptized and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost (see Acts 2:22–24, 37–47 ). Using priesthood power to heal, they ministered to others and created opportunities to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ (see Acts 3:1–11 ).

Things to think about

The second great commandment is to love your neighbor. President Russell M. Nelson taught: “As disciples of Jesus Christ, we are to be examples of how to interact with others— especially when we have differences of opinion. One of the easiest ways to identify a true follower of Jesus Christ is how compassionately that person treats other people.” How can remembering the example of Jesus Christ help you when it is difficult to love others?

Activity for learning with others

Read together the following statement by Elder Neil L. Andersen:

“Never give up—however deep the wounds of your soul, whatever their source, wherever or whenever they happen, and however short or long they persist, you are not meant to perish spiritually. You are meant to survive spiritually and blossom in your faith and trust in God.

“God did not create our spirits to be independent of Him. Our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, through the incalculable gift of His Atonement, not only saves us from death and offers us, through repentance, forgiveness for our sins, but He also stands ready to save us from the sorrows and pains of our wounded souls.”

Discuss the power available to us because of the Savior’s capacity to heal. Invite group members to consider sharing experiences, if appropriate, when they have felt the healing power of Jesus Christ in their life.

Learn more

Matthew 4:23 ; 9:35 ; Luke 4:16–19 ; 9:1–2 ; John 15:12

Neil L. Andersen, “ Wounded ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2018, 83–86

“ The Greatest Commandment ” (video), Gospel Library

Section 4

Jesus Christ Gave His Life to Redeem God’s Children

The Book of Mormon prophet Abinadi prophesied that Jesus Christ would come down from heaven and be mocked, scourged, cast out, crucified, and slain—all so He could redeem His people (see Mosiah 15:1–7 ). The greatest need in the world today is for all to learn and understand the mortal mission of our Lord Jesus Christ, how He suffered and paid the price for our sins so we can be saved.

Some of the most important events in earth’s history occurred during the final hours of the Lord’s life. As the time of the Jewish Passover approached, Jesus took His disciples to Gethsemane, a garden of olive trees on or near the Mount of Olives just outside Jerusalem’s walls. It was here that Jesus Christ prayed and began to take upon Himself all that was demanded for our redemption. King Benjamin prophesied that Jesus Christ would feel “pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue” and “anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of his people” ( Mosiah 3:7 ). We cannot comprehend the intensity and scope of His suffering in Gethsemane, but the agony caused Jesus to sweat “as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground” ( Luke 22:44 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 19:18 ).

Jesus was then betrayed by one of His disciples, arrested, mocked, and falsely charged by Jewish religious leaders. He was taken, interrogated, and beaten by the Romans. (See Matthew 26:47–68 ; 27:1–31 .) Soldiers took Jesus Christ and crucified Him, meaning His hands and feet were nailed to a cross (see Luke 23:33–38 ). As He was lifted up and hung on the cross, the pain and suffering for our sins continued. The Atonement of Jesus Christ includes the payment He made in Gethsemane and on the cross to overcome the effects of sin for all who repent of their sins (see Alma 5:48 ; 3 Nephi 9:22 ; Doctrine and Covenants 19:17 ).

After His death, His body was placed in a tomb (see John 19:38–42 ). On the third day after His Crucifixion, Christ took up His body again and became the first person to be resurrected (see Matthew 28:1–8 ). Many people witnessed the risen Lord and testified of the glorious news. Because Jesus Christ was resurrected, all God’s children will have their spirits reunited with their bodies and receive the blessing of immortality (see 1 Corinthians 15:21–22 ; Alma 11:44–45 ). Everything Jesus Christ endured during His mortal life was done out of His love for all of Heavenly Father’s children (see 1 Nephi 19:9 ; Doctrine and Covenants 34:3 ).

Things to think about

Before going to Gethsemane, Jesus Christ introduced the ordinance of the sacrament to His disciples. Read Matthew 26:26–30 . What can you do to reflect more on the life and Atonement of Jesus Christ when you partake of the sacrament? How can your experience partaking of the sacrament increase your love for Jesus Christ?

Activity for learning with others

Read together following statement by President Russell M. Nelson:

“Condescending to come to earth as the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, He was brutally reviled, mocked, spit upon, and scourged. In the Garden of Gethsemane, our Savior took upon Himself every pain, every sin, and all of the anguish and suffering ever experienced by you and me and by everyone who has ever lived or will ever live. Under the weight of that excruciating burden, He bled from every pore. All of this suffering was intensified as He was cruelly crucified on Calvary’s cross.

“Through these excruciating experiences and His subsequent Resurrection—His infinite Atonement—He granted immortality to all and ransomed each one of us from the effects of sin on condition of our repentance.”

Discuss with the group why it is important to learn about Jesus Christ’s suffering in Gethsemane and on the cross, His death, and His Resurrection. How can understanding more about what Jesus Christ experienced draw you closer to Him?

Learn more

John 6:51 ; 1 Nephi 11:14–23 ; Alma 34:7–14 ; Doctrine and Covenants 88:6

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Lifted Up upon the Cross ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 77–79

Ronald A. Rasband, “ Hosanna to the Most High God ,” Liahona , May 2023, 108–11

“ Why We Need a Savior ” (video), Gospel Library

Other Resources about the Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Videos

Hymns and children’s songs

Resources for children

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ Peacemakers Needed ,” Liahona , May 2023, 98.

Neil L. Andersen, “ Wounded ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2018, 84–85.

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Correct Name of the Church ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2018, 88.
