Mortality
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/mortality-study-guide?lang=eng

“Mortality,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Mortality

Your reason for being

Much of the time, life is busy and we don’t really think about whether there’s any great purpose to it all. We’re just trying to get through another day. And yet there seems to be something inside us that longs to know “Why am I here?” or “What is the purpose of life?”

The restored gospel of Jesus Christ declares with certainty that your life does have a purpose, and you can know it. Put simply, you are here because your Father in Heaven gave you that opportunity, and you joyfully accepted it. Your purpose in this life is to grow, learn about God, become more like Him, and one day receive eternal life with Him. Your understanding of these truths can have a powerful influence on how you view life’s blessings and trials, sorrows and joys.

What Is Mortal Life?

Mortal life is the period between birth and death. The choices we make during mortal life—especially the choice to follow Jesus Christ—determine our eternal destiny.

Topic overview: Mortality

Related gospel study guides: Plan of Salvation , Premortal Life

Section 1

A Chance to Receive a Physical Body

It’s hard to imagine life without our bodies—so much of what we know and experience comes through our physical senses. But you are much more than your body. You have a spirit that existed long before you were born. God, the Father of your spirit, gave you this physical body as a gift to help you experience mortal life and grow to become more like Him. Receiving a physical body and experiencing mortal life on earth is a key part of His plan for your eternal happiness.

Things to think about

What does God want us to understand about our bodies? Ponder this as you read Genesis 1:26–27 ; Moses 2:27 ; and 1 Corinthians 6:19–20 . How is God’s view of your physical body different from messages you see and hear in the world? How can seeing your body as He does affect the choices you make about your body?

Consider watching the video “ God’s Greatest Creation ” (2:51) or reading President Russell M. Nelson’s article “ Your Body: A Magnificent Gift to Cherish .” Record your feelings about the gift of your body. What do you feel inspired to do to show your gratitude for this gift?

Activity for learning with others

For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices has a section titled “ Your Body Is Sacred ” (pages 22–29). Perhaps you could read it together and pause occasionally to ask a question such as “What does this mean to you?” or “How will these principles influence the choices we make about our bodies?”

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 88:15 ; 93:33–35

Russell M. Nelson, “ Decisions for Eternity ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2013, 106–9

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ Your Wonderful Journey Home ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2013, 125–29

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 211–213

Section 2

A Time to Prepare and Prove Ourselves

If you’ve been to school, then you probably know what it’s like to take a test or exam. An exam gives you a chance to show what you’ve learned so you can progress to the next grade or course and learn more.

Life, in some ways, is like an exam or a test. Our experiences—and our responses to those experiences—give us a chance to show “if [we] will do all things whatsoever the Lord … shall command” ( Abraham 3:25 ). But unlike most school tests, the test of life isn’t just a time to be evaluated; it’s also a process of becoming. Because of the Atonement of Jesus Christ, you can correct mistakes through repentance and gradually become more like God. If we use our time on earth to turn to Christ and receive His gospel, He can use our experiences in mortality—including the painful, regrettable experiences—to prepare us for eternity (see Romans 8:28 ).

Things to think about

If someone asked you “What is the purpose of life?” what would you say? Consider how these scripture passages might inform your answer: Alma 12:24 ; 34:31–37 ; Doctrine and Covenants 84:43–48 . How do you “prepare to meet God”?

President Russell M. Nelson said, “This life really is the time when you get to decide what kind of life you want to live forever.” Ask yourself, “What kind of life do I want to live forever? What choices am I making that will lead to that goal? Are there any adjustments I need to make? How can I access the Savior’s power to help me make those changes?”

Activity for learning with others

In the video “ The Challenge to Become ,” President Dallin H. Oaks shares a parable about a wealthy father. This parable could prompt discussion about our Heavenly Father’s purposes for us in mortal life. You could talk about ways parents might help their children prepare for their future. How is Heavenly Father preparing you for the future eternal blessings He wants to give you? Perhaps you could share with each other some experiences and choices that are helping you prepare for eternal life.

Learn more

Romans 5:3–5 ; 1 Peter 1:6–7 ; Doctrine and Covenants 121:7–8 ; 122:5–7

David A. Bednar, “ We Will Prove Them Herewith ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2020, 8–11

Section 3

A Way to Experience Joy in Jesus Christ

The prophet Lehi summed up the purpose of life in one short sentence: “Men are, that they might have joy” ( 2 Nephi 2:25 ). But not even Lehi had an easy life. He had all kinds of worry and sorrow—he had to flee his home to save his life, and two of his sons rebelled against him. Of Lehi’s description of life’s purpose, President Nelson said: “Imagine! Of all the words [Lehi] could have used to describe the nature and purpose of our lives here in mortality, he chose the word joy !” Even with all the trials and hard work involved in mortal life, we should never forget that what our Father really wants, ultimately, is for us to receive the joy that He has.

Things to think about

During times that don’t feel particularly joyful—and we all have them—a scripture such as Hebrews 4:14–16 can help. What do you learn about the Savior from these verses? What qualifies Him to offer “help in time of need”?

Activity for learning with others

Explore together what President Nelson taught about how to find joy in “Joy and Spiritual Survival.” Maybe you could share with each other how you’ve found joy in Christ, even during difficult times.

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 101:36–38 ; Moses 5:10–12

D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Joy of the Saints ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2019, 15–18

Other Resources about the Purpose of Mortal Life

Scriptures

Messages from Church Leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ Your Body: A Magnificent Gift to Cherish ,” New Era , Aug. 2019, 2–7.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Choices for Eternity ” (worldwide devotional for young adults, May 15, 2022), Gospel Library.

“ The Challenge to Become ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org .

Russell M. Nelson, “ Joy and Spiritual Survival ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2016, 82.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Joy and Spiritual Survival ,” 81–84.
