Movies and Television
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/movies-and-television?lang=eng

Overview

Movies and Television

Overview

Like other forms of media, movies and television can offer much that is informative, uplifting, and appropriately entertaining. However, many movies and television programs can be spiritually damaging as inappropriate behaviors and viewpoints are depicted as normal and even desirable. Church leaders have warned families of the potential dangers in this type of entertainment, counseling them to avoid such, and have encouraged members to join others in speaking out against offensive programming.

President M. Russell Ballard, Acting President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, taught:

“The choices we make in media can be symbolic of the choices we make in life. Choosing the trendy, the titillating, the tawdry in the TV programs or movies we watch can cause us to end up, if we’re not careful, choosing the same things in the lives we live.

“If we do not make good choices, the media can devastate our families and pull our children away from the narrow gospel path. In the virtual reality and the perceived reality of large and small screens, family-destructive viewpoints and behavior are regularly portrayed as pleasurable, as stylish, as exciting, and as normal. Often media’s most devastating attacks on family are not direct or frontal or openly immoral. Intelligent evil is too cunning for that, knowing that most people still profess belief in family and in traditional values. Rather the attacks are subtle and amoral—issues of right and wrong don’t even come up. Immorality and sexual innuendo are everywhere, causing some to believe that because everyone is doing it, it must be all right. This pernicious evil is not out in the street somewhere; it is coming right into our homes, right into the heart of our families. …

“The time has come when members of the Church need to speak out and join with the many other concerned people in opposition to the offensive, destructive, and mean-spirited media influence that is sweeping over the earth.

“According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, the percentage of television prime-time shows with sexual content jumped from 67 percent in 1998 to 75 percent in the year 2000. Media with this kind of content has numerous negative effects. It fosters a callous attitude toward women, who are often portrayed as objects of abuse and not as precious daughters of God who are essential to His eternal plan. The long-cherished values of abstinence from intimate relationships before marriage and complete fidelity between husband and wife after marriage are denigrated and derided. Children and youth are confused and misled by the deviant behavior they see demonstrated by so-called stars they admire and want to emulate. In the moral confusion created by the media, enduring values are being abandoned” ( “Let Our Voices Be Heard,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2003, 16–18).

Related Topics

Media

Scriptures

Scripture References

Isaiah 5:20

Philippians 4:8

2 Nephi 2:26–27

Moroni 7:12–19

Doctrine and Covenants 60:13

Moroni 10:32

Articles of Faith 1:13

Messages from Church Leaders

The Effects of Television

President M. Russell Ballard

Your Refined Heavenly Home

Elder Douglas L. Callister

Additional Messages

Videos

“Standing Up: Civility”

“Blockbuster”

“At the Movies”

“Goshen Behind the Scenes”

“LDS Filmmaker Brings Stories of Early Saints to Life”

“Wholesome Recreation”

“Things as They Really Are”

Learning Resources

General Resources

“So, Can I Watch It or Not?” youth.ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“Out of the Best Books, Movies, or Music,” youth.ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“Music and Dancing,” For the Strength of Youth

“Entertainment and Media,” For the Strength of Youth

Church Magazines

“How can I stay free?” Friend, August 2015

“Choose the Right Media,” Friend, April 2012

“Chain Reaction,” New Era, October 2011

“Unplugged,” Ensign, January 2008

“Just a Little Violence?” Liahona, August 2007

“Walking Out,” New Era, September 2002

“No One Will Know,” New Era, February 2002

“Setting Family Standards for Entertainment,” Ensign, June 2001

“Controlling the Media’s Influence in Your Home,” Liahona, February 2000

“Reel Life vs. Real Life,” Ensign, June 1993

“Can I Watch a Movie?” Ensign, December 1991

“What’s on TV Tonight?” Ensign, February 1988

“Helping Children Understand the Media’s Influence,” Ensign, January 1987

In the News

“How Mormons Deal With Fame,” Newsroom

“Elder M. Russell Ballard: Engaging Without Being Defensive,” Newsroom

“The Publicity Dilemma,” Newsroom

“Using New Media to Support the Work of the Church,” Newsroom

“As Morality in Media Falls, Parents Should Do More, Network Founder Tells NPR,” Newsroom

“Roku Latter-day Saints Channel Allows Instant TV Access to Church Media,” Newsroom

“History of Church-Produced Mormon Films,” Newsroom

“‘Meet the Mormons’ Movie to Show on TV Channels, Digital Outlets,” Newsroom

“Faith-Based Media Experiences Revival, Finds New Audiences,” Newsroom

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“Happiness and Social Enjoyment”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young, chapter 26

“Let Us Conquer Ourselves”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith, chapter 42

“Bringing Up Children in Light and Truth”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: George Albert Smith, chapter 22

“Overcoming Temptation”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: David O. McKay, chapter 9

“Living the Law of Chastity”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Harold B. Lee, chapter 20

“Fortifying Ourselves against Evil Influences”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Spencer W. Kimball, chapter 10

“Marriage and Family—Ordained of God”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson, chapter 14

“The Sacred Callings of Fathers and Mothers”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson, chapter 15

“Keeping the Law of Chastity”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson, chapter 17

“True Greatness”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Howard W. Hunter, chapter 11

Stories

“Our Duty to God: The Mission of the Parents and Leaders to the Rising Generation,” Ensign or Liahona, May 2010

Elder Robert D. Hales

Teaching Resources

Teaching Outlines

“Doctrine and Covenants 63:1–21”

Doctrine and Covenants and Church History Seminary Teacher Manual, lesson 67

“Moroni 1–3”

Book of Mormon Seminary Teacher Manual, lesson 152

Media

Audio

“The director of the Meet the Mormons film talks about the movie,” Latter-day Saints Channel Daily, episode 596

“Are You Media Literate?” Latter-day Saints Channel Daily, episode 809

“Filmmaker T.C. Christensen,” Everything Creative, episode 12

“Jane Clayson Johnson,” Conversations, episode 50

“Technology in the Home: A Blessing or a Curse?—Part 1,” Gospel Solutions for Families, episode 3

“Technology in the Home: A Blessing or a Curse?—Part 2,” Gospel Solutions for Families, episode 4

Music

“Do What Is Right,” Hymns, 237

“Choose the Right,” Hymns, 239

“Teach Me to Walk in the Light,” Hymns , 304

Images

Date at the Movie Theater, Media Library

Family Watching Conference, Media Library

Use Shelf Control, Media Library

Free Filter, Media Library

Too Much Information? Media Library

General Conference, Media Library

You Are What You Watch, Media Library
