Obedience
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/obedience?lang=eng

“Obedience,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Obedience

One reason we are here on the earth is to show our willingness to obey Heavenly Father’s commandments. God gives commandments for our benefit. Obedience to the commandments leads to blessings from God and shows our love for Him.

Some people feel that the commandments are burdensome and that they limit freedom and personal growth. But the Savior taught that true freedom comes only from following Him: “If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 1 God gives commandments for our benefit. They are loving instructions for our happiness and for our physical and spiritual well-being.

In the premortal existence , Heavenly Father presided over a great Council in Heaven . There we learned of His plan for our salvation , which included a time of testing on the earth: “We will make an earth whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them.” 2 One reason we are here on the earth is to show our willingness to obey Heavenly Father’s commandments.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that obedience to the commandments leads to blessings from God. He said: “There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated.” 3 King Benjamin also taught this principle. “I would desire that ye should consider on the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God,” he counseled. “For behold, they are blessed in all things, both temporal and spiritual; and if they hold out faithful to the end they are received into heaven, that thereby they may dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness. O remember, remember that these things are true; for the Lord God hath spoken it.” 4

Our obedience to the commandments is an expression of our love for Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ. The Savior said, “If ye love me, keep my commandments.” 5 He later declared: “If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father’s commandments, and abide in his love.” 6

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Gospel Study Guide

Resources for children

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

John 8:31–32 .

Abraham 3:24–25 .

Doctrine and Covenants 130:20–21 .

Mosiah 2:41 .

John 14:15 .

John 15:10 .
