Obedience
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/obedience-study-guide?lang=eng

“Obedience,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Obedience

Following God with a willing heart

Parents recognize the importance of teaching small children to avoid touching a hot stove or running into the street in front of cars. If children obey, whether or not they understand why obedience is necessary, they will enjoy greater safety and protection.

In our premortal life, the Lord declared that providing God’s children with a mortal experience on earth was necessary to “prove them … to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them” ( Abraham 3:25 ). God desires that we each learn to follow Him and obey His commandments. When we do so, we will receive the blessing of living with Him in “a state of never-ending happiness” ( Mosiah 2:41 ). By using our moral agency and the guidance of the Spirit, we can begin to see why God has given us laws to obey. Heavenly Father promises happiness and blessings to all who will heed His words and willingly observe His commandments.

What Is Obedience?

In the gospel of Jesus Christ, obedience is understood as doing God’s will and keeping His commandments. It includes exercising our agency, or freedom of choice, to follow God with a willing heart. We demonstrate our love for God when we choose to trust and submit to His will.

Topic overview: Obedience

Related gospel study guides: Commandments , Repentance , Covenants and Ordinances

Section 1

Jesus Christ Obeyed God the Father in All Things

Jesus Christ declared, “I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me” ( John 6:38 ). Throughout His mortal life, Jesus demonstrated obedience to all His Father’s laws and commandments. He said, “I do always those things that please him” ( John 8:29 ).

In the Garden of Gethsemane, Jesus prayed, “Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done” ( Luke 22:42 ). After suffering in Gethsemane, He humbly submitted to His Father’s will and was crucified, making Himself an offering to redeem all of us (see Mosiah 15:7 ). Because Jesus Christ was obedient to His Father in all things, He made salvation and exaltation possible for God’s children.

In our day, the Lord asks us to follow in His footsteps and “live by every word which proceedeth forth out of the mouth of God” ( Doctrine and Covenants 98:11 ; see also Deuteronomy 8:3 ). Jesus Christ clarified the most important reason for us to obey God when He issued the direct and simple invitation “If ye love me, keep my commandments” ( John 14:15 ).

Things to think about

Jesus Christ lived a sinless and holy life. He invites us to follow Him. Read 2 Nephi 31:7–10 . What is required of those who desire to follow Jesus Christ?

God declared that His work and glory is to “bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” ( Moses 1:39 ). Read Doctrine and Covenants 11:20 and consider what the Lord identifies as “your work.”

Activity for learning with others

Elder Robert D. Hales taught, “Because our Savior was obedient, He atoned for our sins, making possible our resurrection and preparing the way for us to return to our Heavenly Father.” Discuss what blessings we enjoy because Jesus Christ was perfectly obedient to God the Father. What would God have us do to show our gratitude for the many blessings we receive?

Learn more

Matthew 22:37–38 ; John 14:21 ; Mosiah 3:19

Robert D. Hales, “ If Ye Love Me, Keep My Commandments ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2014, 35–38

D. Todd Christofferson, “ That They May Be One in Us ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2002, 71–73

Section 2

Your Obedience to God Will Lead to Happiness and Blessings

We learn in the Book of Mormon that all who heard King Benjamin’s significant sermon were deeply converted to Jesus Christ. As a result, they expressed a willingness to covenant to keep God’s commandments (see Mosiah 5:1–7 ). One of the responsibilities members of Christ’s Church have in our day is to keep all of God’s commandments (see Doctrine and Covenants 42:78 ). The Prophet Joseph Smith explained how important this duty was to him when he said, “I made this my rule: When the Lord commands, do it. ”

Our loving Heavenly Father has revealed the eternal principle that governs how blessings are given: “When we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated” (see Doctrine and Covenants 130:20–21 ). There are various reasons we might choose to obey God’s commandments. At times, we may do so out of fear of punishment. Sometimes we might simply be seeking the promised reward. But the most important reason to be obedient is that we love Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and want to serve Them. God “requireth the heart and a willing mind” ( Doctrine and Covenants 64:34 ).

Things to think about

Think about all the ways Heavenly Father has demonstrated His love for you. Read Mosiah 2:20–24 . Why is our obedience all that God requires of us? Now read Mosiah 2:41 . How might you describe to another person how generous God is to those who sincerely seek to obey His commandments?

Lehi’s family experienced great difficulties as they traveled in the wilderness for several years. Because they sought to keep God’s commandments, the Lord blessed them. Read 1 Nephi 17:1–4 . According to verse 3 , what is God prepared to do for those who keep His commandments?

We will not always understand why God has given certain commandments. Yet when we exercise our agency and choose to trust and obey God, we can be confident that everything will work for our good (see Doctrine and Covenants 100:15 ). The Savior promised us: “If you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God” ( Doctrine and Covenants 14:7 ).

Activity for learning with others

President Ezra Taft Benson declared, “When we put God first, all other things fall into their proper place or drop out of our lives.” What does it mean to you to “put God first”? Ask group members to talk about times when they have seen that “all other things fall into their proper place or drop out of our lives” when we put God first.

Learn more

Leviticus 26:3–13 ; Deuteronomy 4:40 ; 1 Nephi 3:1–7 ; Helaman 14:30–31 ; Doctrine and Covenants 59:23

Thomas S. Monson, “ The Blessings of Obedience ,” Ensign or Liahona , Oct. 2016, 4–6

D. Todd Christofferson, “ Why the Covenant Path ,” Liahona , May 2021, 116–19

“ Obedience: ‘When the Lord Commands, Do It ,’” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 159–69

Other Resources about Obedience

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Robert D. Hales, “ If Ye Love Me, Keep My Commandments ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2014, 35.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 160 .

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 40 .
