Patriarchal Blessings
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/patriarchal-blessings-study-guide?lang=eng

“Patriarchal Blessings,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Patriarchal Blessings

Personal and inspired direction from Heavenly Father

In the Book of Mormon, the prophet Lehi discovered a round ball made of brass, which had two spindles (see 1 Nephi 16:10 ). His family found that this ball or compass, which they called “Liahona,” pointed where they should travel in the wilderness. It worked according to their faith in God (see Alma 37:38–40 ). A patriarchal blessing can function for us like the Liahona did for Lehi’s family.

President Thomas S. Monson declared: “The same Lord who provided a Liahona for Lehi provides for you and for me today a rare and valuable gift to give direction to our lives, to mark the hazards to our safety, and to chart the way, even safe passage—not to a promised land, but to our heavenly home. The gift to which I refer is known as your patriarchal blessing.”

Heavenly Father provides divine guidance to us in many ways—through prayer, the scriptures, the words of living prophets, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Your patriarchal blessing is another important tool that can provide you with spiritual direction, counsel, and assurance as you face the uncertainties and challenges of life.

What Is a Patriarchal Blessing?

A patriarchal blessing is an individualized priesthood blessing received from an ordained and authorized patriarch by the laying on of hands. It generally contains personal and inspired direction and counsel from Heavenly Father. A patriarchal blessing also includes a declaration of a person’s lineage in the house of Israel, or as a descendant of Abraham. A patriarchal blessing is transcribed, with a copy given to the member and another kept in the records of the Church. Every member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is encouraged to receive a patriarchal blessing.

Topic overview: Patriarchal Blessings

Related gospel study guides: Priesthood Blessing , Revelation , Covenants and Ordinances

Section 1

What Is a Patriarchal Blessing?

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints may receive priesthood blessings by the laying on of hands on many occasions during their lives. Members can request priesthood blessings from a Melchizedek Priesthood holder anytime they need healing or desire comfort, wisdom, and divine guidance. However, patriarchal blessings are distinct from these priesthood blessings.

Patriarchs hold a unique priesthood office and are set apart to give special blessings to worthy members of the Church. A person should be spiritually prepared and mature enough to understand the significance of his or her patriarchal blessing, though there is no minimum or maximum age requirement. A person usually receives only one patriarchal blessing during his or her life. Patriarchal blessings are recorded, transcribed, and preserved in Church records. They are sacred and should not be read publicly or interpreted by others.

Things to think about

To better understand the history of patriarchal blessings in the Church, review the Church History Topic “ Patriarchal Blessings ,” found in the Gospel Library. What do you learn about patriarchal blessings from this article? Why do you think they have always been recorded and kept in Church records? What does this teach you about your own patriarchal blessing and its significance?

Read Articles of Faith 1:6 . Joseph Smith taught that the term “evangelist” in the Church of Jesus Christ refers to the ordained priesthood office of patriarch. For more information about this, consider reading President Boyd K. Packer’s talk “ The Stake Patriarch .”

Activity for learning with others

The process of receiving a patriarchal blessing may not be familiar to all group members. Invite them to ask questions about patriarchal blessings, and list the questions for the whole group to see if possible. Then review General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 18.17 , in the Gospel Library, looking for answers to group members’ questions. What does this activity teach you about patriarchal blessings?

Learn more

Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 48:5–11 (in the Bible appendix); Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 50:24–37 (in the Bible appendix); Ephesians 4:11 ; 2 Nephi 4:1–12 ; Doctrine and Covenants 107:39, 53, 56

Kazuhiko Yamashita, “ When to Receive Your Patriarchal Blessing ,” Liahona , May 2023, 88–90

Section 2

What Is the Declaration of Lineage in a Patriarchal Blessing?

Every patriarchal blessing contains a declaration of lineage. When God’s children are baptized and become members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, they inherit the promises God made to Abraham and his posterity if they remain righteous (see Abraham 2:9–11 ). While a person may descend through more than one family line from the house of Israel, one specific tribe is normally identified, confirming that the individual has a family connection to Abraham. Whether this declaration means that a person is a literal descendant by blood or through spiritual adoption is not important (see Abraham 2:10 ). This declaration of lineage shows a family line through which the individual can inherit the promised blessings of Abraham. It also reminds a faithful person of the spiritual responsibilities he or she has as a descendant of Abraham (see Abraham 2:11 ).

Things to think about

Why is it significant that you are part of the family of Abraham? Elder David A. Bednar taught, “One of the primary reasons we receive a patriarchal blessing is to help us more fully understand who we are as the posterity of Abraham and to recognize the responsibility that rests upon us.” What responsibilities do you have as an heir of the blessings promised to Abraham? What do you learn from your patriarchal blessing about your individual talents and characteristics that can help you build the kingdom of God?

Activity for learning with others

Share the following statement with your group members. President Russell M. Nelson taught, “In our day we are privileged to receive patriarchal blessings and learn of our connection to the ancient patriarchs.” You might ask group members what it means to them to know they are connected as family to Abraham and other ancient patriarchs.

Learn more

Randall K. Bennett, “ Your Patriarchal Blessing—Inspired Direction from Heavenly Father ,” Liahona , May 2023, 42–43

Julie B. Beck, “ You Have a Noble Birthright ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2006, 106–8

Section 3

Heavenly Father Will Help You Feel His Love through Your Patriarchal Blessing

A patriarchal blessing is an expression of Heavenly Father’s love for each of His children. It is evidence that He knows us personally. When you prayerfully study your patriarchal blessing, you will sense that your Heavenly Father is mindful of you and has a divine plan for your happiness. Receiving a patriarchal blessing is a precious gift.

A patriarchal blessing may contain cautions, counsel, and promises unique to you. This inspired blessing can be considered personal scripture for the recipient and can help you understand your potential and possibilities. It can also provide peace and hope in times of difficulty and uncertainty. And while a patriarchal blessing does not detail everything that will happen in your life, it is a useful guide to help you find purpose and feel God’s love. All blessings and promises in patriarchal blessings are conditional, based upon our faithfulness (see Doctrine and Covenants 130:20–21 ). Because patriarchal blessings are for our eternal existence, some of our promised blessings may not be fulfilled until after this mortal life.

Things to think about

President Russell M. Nelson taught: “Do you see the importance of your patriarchal blessing? … It is precious. It is personal scripture to you. It declares your special lineage. It reminds you of your linkage with the past. And it will help you realize your future potential. Literally, you can lay claim upon the Lord for fulfillment of those blessings through your faithfulness.” How do you feel when you consider these teachings?

Activity for learning with others

Remind group members that sometimes it can be difficult to know how to interpret your patriarchal blessing. Some passages or phrases may have several potential meanings. Share President Dallin H. Oaks’s counsel: “[A patriarchal blessing] is given under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit and should be read and interpreted under the influence of that same Spirit.” How can you invite the Holy Spirit as you read and interpret your patriarchal blessing? How might your understanding of passages in your patriarchal blessing change throughout your life?

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 78:17–18

Thomas S. Monson, “ Your Patriarchal Blessing: A Liahona of Light ,” Ensign , Nov. 1986, 65–67

Other Resources about Patriarchal Blessings

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

Thomas S. Monson, “ Your Patriarchal Blessing: A Liahona of Light ,” Ensign , Nov. 1986, 65.

Boyd K. Packer, “ The Stake Patriarch ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2002, 42–45.

David A. Bednar, “ Becoming a Missionary ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2005, 47.

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Everlasting Covenant ,” Liahona , Oct. 2022, 10.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Thanks for the Covenant ” (Brigham Young University devotional, Nov. 22, 1988), 5, speeches.byu.edu .

Dallin H. Oaks, quoted in Richard M. Romney, “ Patriarchal Blessings—Insights from Prophets and Patriarchs ” (digital-only article), Liahona , Feb. 2022, Gospel Library.
