Patriarchal Blessing
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/patriarchal-blessings?lang=eng

“Patriarchal Blessing,” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Patriarchal Blessing

A patriarchal blessing is a special priesthood blessing available to members of the Church. All members are invited to faithfully and prayerfully receive it.

A vital part of a patriarchal blessing is to declare a person’s lineage within the house of Israel. It also offers spiritual guidance, reassurance, and comfort throughout our life, especially as we follow the counsel it provides.

What Is a Patriarch?

A patriarchal blessing is received from an ordained patriarch by the laying on of hands. This man is a Melchizedek Priesthood holder who is ordained to the office of patriarch. He is set apart to serve members in a specific stake. Patriarchs are devoted followers of Jesus Christ who strive to be sensitive to the inspiration of the Holy Spirit.

The word patriarch also refers to the father of a family. It reminds us of Old Testament patriarchs like Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob who led and blessed their descendants. Adam was the first patriarch, and he was responsible for blessing his posterity and helping them live righteously.

What Is a Declaration of Lineage?

A patriarchal blessing includes a declaration of our lineage in the house of Israel as a descendant of Abraham. It tells us through which tribe of Israel we will receive the blessings that God promised Abraham.

Israel is the special name that the Lord gave to Jacob. Jacob is the son of Isaac and grandson of Abraham. The name Israel can refer specifically to Jacob, to his descendants, or to the kingdom of those descendants. The twelve tribes of Israel are descended from Jacob’s sons and grandsons.

Lineage may be through any of the tribes of Israel, such as Ephraim, Manasseh, or Judah. Though we may not all be literal descendants of Jacob, those who accept the gospel of Jesus Christ are adopted into the house of Israel. Because each of us descends through more than one family line, two members of the same family may have their declared lineage through different tribes of Israel.

All Church members are considered descendants of Abraham and heirs to all the promises and blessings of the Abrahamic covenant .

How Can We Learn from a Patriarchal Blessing?

Life is full of questions, challenges, and choices. Our Heavenly Father has not left us alone to wander without His help. He offers His loving guidance through prayer, scriptures, prophets, and the Holy Spirit. He also offers us a patriarchal blessing.

Heavenly Father knows you. He loves you. He knows your strengths, weaknesses, and eternal potential. Your patriarchal blessing contains His personal counsel for you. It may also include promises and warnings that will provide peace and protection. You should study it prayerfully and often. As you follow its counsel, you will make better choices and can receive God’s promised blessings.

The blessing will not answer all our questions or list all that will happen in our life. If the blessing does not mention an important event, such as a full-time mission or marriage, that does not mean we will not have that opportunity.

Also, we should not assume that everything mentioned in a blessing will be fulfilled in this life. If we are faithful, all promises will be fulfilled in the Lord’s due time. Blessings that are not fulfilled in this life will be fulfilled in the next life.

Patriarchal blessings are sacred and personal. They may be shared with immediate family members but are not meant to be compared with other blessings or shared in public.

How Can We Receive a Patriarchal Blessing?

All worthy members of the Church are invited to receive a patriarchal blessing. Many members receive their blessing when they are teenagers and many important decisions in life are still ahead. However, older adults are also encouraged to receive their blessing. Members who desire to receive a blessing should meet with their bishop or branch president.

A patriarchal blessing is recorded and transcribed. A copy is given to the member and another is kept in the records of the Church. If the member copy is lost or ruined, a new one can be requested from the Patriarchal Blessings page on ChurchofJesusChrist.org . Members may also access their patriarchal blessing from the Home section of the Gospel Library app. To view the blessing, a member must be signed in using their Church Account.

Related Topics

Patriarch

Priesthood Blessing

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Patriarchal Blessing Study Guide

Resources for children

Note

See Abraham 2:9–10 .

See Thomas S. Monson, “ Your Patriarchal Blessing: A Liahona of Light ,” Ensign , Nov. 1986, 65–67.
