Peace
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/peace?lang=eng

“Peace,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Peace

Many people think of peace as the absence of war. But we can feel peace even in times of war, and we can lack peace even when no war is raging. Peace comes through the gospel—through the Atonement of Jesus Christ , the ministration of the Holy Ghost , and our own righteousness, sincere repentance , and diligent service .

Even when the world is in turmoil all around us, we can receive the blessing of inner peace. This blessing will continue with us as we stay true to our testimony of the gospel and as we remember that Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ love us and watch over us.

In addition to feeling peace ourselves, we can be an influence for peace in our families, our community, and the world. We work for peace when we keep the commandments, give service, care for family members and neighbors, and share the gospel. We work for peace whenever we help relieve the suffering of another.

The following words of the Savior teach us how we can experience the peace that the gospel brings:

“The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

“Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.” 1

“Fear not to do good, my sons, for whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye also reap; therefore, if ye sow good ye shall also reap good for your reward.

“Therefore, fear not, little flock; do good; let earth and hell combine against you, for if ye are built upon my rock, they cannot prevail.

“Behold, I do not condemn you; go your ways and sin no more; perform with soberness the work which I have commanded you.

“Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not.

“Behold the wounds which pierced my side, and also the prints of the nails in my hands and feet; be faithful, keep my commandments, and ye shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.” 2

“These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.” 3

As we remember the Savior and follow Him, we truly can be of good cheer. We can experience real, enduring peace at all times. We can find hope in the Savior’s first words to His disciples after His Resurrection: “Peace be unto you.” 4

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

John 14:26–27 .

Doctrine and Covenants 6:33–37 .

John 16:33 .

John 20:19 .
