Plan of Salvation
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/plan-of-salvation-study-guide?lang=eng

“Plan of Salvation,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Plan of Salvation

Heavenly Father’s plan for our safe and happy return to Him

Have you ever wondered why you’re on earth or what your purpose in life is? Do you sometimes wonder why life is so hard? Do you worry about what will happen when you or a loved one dies? When you face challenging questions like these—and we all do—it helps to know that Heavenly Father has a plan for you, for all of us. Understanding that plan can help you find answers to these questions and find true happiness, no matter what might be happening in your life.

What Is the Plan of Salvation?

The plan of salvation, or plan of happiness, is Heavenly Father’s plan to help us become like Him and return to Him. The Creation of the earth, the Fall of Adam and Eve, our birth and death, the Atonement of Jesus Christ, our resurrection and Final Judgment, and all the laws, commandments, and gifts of God are part of His plan. Jesus Christ has the central role in bringing about the salvation of Heavenly Father’s children. Through His Atonement, He makes the plan possible, enabling us to fulfill the plan’s purpose—to receive eternal life with God.

Topic overview: Plan of Salvation

Related gospel study guides: Premortal Life , Mortal Life , Eternal Life

Section 1

Heavenly Father Prepared His Plan So You Could Become like Him

All of us—everyone who has ever lived or will ever live on earth—lived with our heavenly parents before we were born. We were Their spirit sons and daughters, but there was much we needed to experience to become like Them. Heavenly Father loves us and wants all of us to live as He does: in eternal glory together with our loved ones. That’s why He prepared the plan of salvation.

God’s work and glory is “to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man” ( Moses 1:39 ). In other words, the whole purpose of the plan is for us to become like God and live eternally with Him. Knowing about the plan can help you understand your divine identity and eternal potential.

Things to think about

Read or watch President Dieter F. Uchtdorf’s talk “ You Matter to Him .” What does it mean to you to know that God “sees you as the being you are capable and designed to become”? How can that knowledge change how you think about and treat yourself and others?

Activity for learning with others

Through His example, Jesus Christ showed us how we can become like God. Make a list of some attributes that come to mind when you think of Him. (You could look at chapter 6 of Preach My Gospel for some ideas.) Share how you see some of these qualities in each other. Invite each person to choose one of those attributes that he or she would like to develop and to make a plan to strengthen that attribute. Share your plans with each other, and encourage one another as you strive to accomplish your goals.

Learn more

Alma 12:28–34

Robert D. Hales, “ The Plan of Salvation: A Sacred Treasure of Knowledge to Guide Us ,” Ensign , Oct. 2015, 25–31.

Section 2

Understanding the Plan Will Help You through Difficult Situations

When you understand that this life is only a small part of your existence, you can hang on to hope when you experience trials. That doesn’t mean you’ll always be able to answer questions like “Why did this happen?” But even when your understanding is limited, you can be sure that God loves you (see 1 Nephi 11:17 ) and that your challenges won’t last forever. You can also know that because of Jesus Christ, death is not the end; it’s merely a step on the path to becoming like God.

Things to think about

Watch “ Plan of Salvation—We’re Still a Family ” (4:47). The young man in the video asks, “What does it mean to have eternal perspective?” Ponder how you would answer this question. You might want to share your thoughts with a family member or friend or record them in a journal.

Read the following scriptures, looking for different names for the plan of salvation: 2 Nephi 9:6, 13 ; 11:5 ; Alma 34:16 ; 41:2 ; 42:8, 31 . What do these names teach you about God’s plan?

Activity for learning with others

How can you focus on Heavenly Father’s plan as you press forward through life? President Russell M. Nelson taught, “When the focus of our lives is on God’s plan of salvation … and Jesus Christ and His gospel, we can feel joy regardless of what is happening—or not happening—in our lives.” Talk together about how you can make Christ and His gospel the focus of your lives. You could take turns taking photos of a room. Then let each person choose which part of the room he or she will focus on. Look at the photos together, and talk about how the room looks different from different perspectives. Talk about how focusing on Christ can help us see our lives from an eternal perspective.

Learn more

Romans 8:31–39 ; Moses 6:57–62

Russell M. Nelson, “ Drawing the Power of Jesus Christ into Our Lives ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2017, 39–42

Russell M. Nelson, “ Christ Is Risen; Faith in Him Will Move Mountains ,” Liahona , May 2021, 101–4

Thomas S. Monson, “ The Perfect Path to Happiness ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2016, 80–81

Section 3

Jesus Christ Makes the Plan Possible for Everyone

Maybe you feel that you’ve made too many mistakes or that you’ll never be good enough to receive all of God’s promised blessings. If the success of God’s plan depended solely on your personal efforts, that would be true. But Jesus Christ makes God’s eternal plan possible for everyone. Because of His atoning sacrifice, we don’t have to do it all ourselves. He invites all to learn of the plan, repent, make and keep covenants with Him, and enjoy the promised blessings of the plan. When we do all we can to exercise faith in Him, repent, and keep our covenants, He will make up the difference and strengthen us along the way. We can find happiness in the plan, knowing His promises are sure.

Things to think about

Read or watch Elder Adrián Ochoa’s address from the April 2022 general conference, “ Is the Plan Working? ” Elder Ochoa describes three principles that may help if you feel the plan of salvation isn’t working in your life. Notice how Jesus Christ is integral to each of those principles. Make a goal to focus more on Him. As you work on your goal, record your feelings about how you see the plan of happiness working in your life.

Learn more

Alma 22:12–16

Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Great Plan ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 93–96

Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Godhead and the Plan of Salvation ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2017, 100–103

L. Tom Perry, “ The Plan of Salvation ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2006, 69–72

“ The Plan of Salvation ” (video), Gospel Library

Other Resources about the Plan of Salvation

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ You Matter to Him ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2011, 19–22.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Joy and Spiritual Survival ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2016, 82.

Adrián Ochoa, “ Is the Plan Working? ,” Liahona , May 2022, 47–49.
