Prayer
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/prayer-study-guide?lang=eng

“Prayer,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Prayer

Sincere, heartfelt communication with Heavenly Father

You can probably think of moments in your life when you needed divine help or guidance. Perhaps you lost something, had an important question, or experienced an urgent need for rescue. And sometimes you may have simply looked for strength or courage just to keep moving forward. Prayer is the act of turning to God in sincerity and sharing with Him your feelings, thoughts, and needs. The miracle of prayer is that when you reach out to Heavenly Father, He hears you (see Jeremiah 29:12–13 ). No matter who you are, regardless of your mistakes or imperfections, Heavenly Father wants you to communicate with Him through prayer. God’s perfect love ensures that you can tell Him anything, and He will listen.

What Is Prayer?

Prayer is sincere, heartfelt communication with Heavenly Father. It is one of the greatest blessings God gives to His children to seek His heavenly guidance each day. Jesus taught, “Ye must always pray unto the Father in my name” ( 3 Nephi 18:19 ).

Topic overview: Prayer

Related gospel study guides: God the Father , Worship God the Father , Revelation , Fasting

Section 1

God Invites His Children to Pray Always

Jesus Christ taught His followers to pray to God the Father (see Matthew 6:5–13 ; 3 Nephi 17:11–20 ). Heavenly Father commands us to “pray always” ( Doctrine and Covenants 19:38 ), because He loves us and desires to bless us. He wants us to establish a pattern of turning to Him daily in prayer. He also wants us to continue praying in our hearts throughout the day (see Mosiah 24:11–12 ; 3 Nephi 20:1 ). When we pray to Heavenly Father in the name of Jesus Christ (see 3 Nephi 18:19 ; 19:6 ), we show our faith in our Savior and our willingness to follow Him. Therefore, we reverently speak the Lord’s name as we close a prayer, saying “in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.”

Because prayer is the way we approach God the Father, we try to use words that demonstrate sincerity and reverence. President Dallin H. Oaks explained: “The Prophet Joseph Smith said, ‘It is a great thing to inquire at the hands of God, or to come into His presence.’ … The special language of prayer reminds us of the greatness of that privilege.” With the sacredness of prayer in mind, we should use “pronouns of the scriptures when we address God—Thee, Thou, Thy, and Thine, rather than the more common pronouns you, your, and yours” as appropriate.

Things to think about

The Lord told Joseph Smith, “Pray always, that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work” ( Doctrine and Covenants 10:5 ). What does it mean to pray always? What are some reasons why each of us needs Heavenly Father’s spiritual protection?

Activity for learning with others

The scriptures contain many examples of prayer. Read 2 Nephi 4:30–35 and Alma 34:17–27 with others, looking for guidance about when we should pray and for what we should pray. How can the pattern of prayer found in these passages influence how we choose to pray?

Learn more

Psalm 55:17 ; Matthew 7:7–11 ; 2 Nephi 32:8–9 ; Alma 37:36–37 ; 3 Nephi 18:15, 18–19 ; Doctrine and Covenants 19:28

M. Russell Ballard, “ Watch Ye Therefore, and Pray Always ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2020, 77–79

David A. Bednar, “ Pray Always ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2008, 41–44

Section 2

Sincere Prayer Will Draw You Closer to Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ

At times when we pray, we may find ourselves using the same words or phrases over and over. Can you imagine using routine or meaningless language each time you visit with friends or family members? Our efforts to communicate sincerely with other people should remind us how to speak to Heavenly Father in prayer. God wants our prayers to be sincere. In the Book of Mormon, the prophet Enos “did pour out [his] whole soul unto God” in prayer seeking blessings ( Enos 1:9 ). In a similar way, we turn to God for specific blessings both for ourselves and for others.

As a form of worship, prayer has the power to draw us close to Heavenly Father (see Doctrine and Covenants 88:62–64 ). When sincere prayer is combined with fasting, we can receive the spirit of revelation and our hearts can be purified and sanctified (see Alma 17:3 ; Helaman 3:35 ).

Things to think about

The Apostle Paul taught the Saints to “pray without ceasing” and “in every thing give thanks” ( 1 Thessalonians 5:17–18 ). What does it mean to you to “pray without ceasing”? Why is expressing gratitude an important part of prayer? What could you do to make sincere prayer a greater part of your efforts to draw close to Heavenly Father?

Heavenly Father hears and answers every sincere prayer. Some prayers are silent; others are spoken vocally. Read the following examples of spoken prayer: Matthew 26:39–44 ; John 17:1 ; 2 Nephi 4:24 ; Enos 1:4 ; Joseph Smith—History 1:14 . What has been your experience with praying vocally? What have you found helpful about praying aloud?

Activity for learning with others

Read or watch “ The Soul’s Sincere Desire ” by Sister Carol F. McConkie. In this message, Sister McConkie said, “In faith we pray, we listen, and we obey, that we might learn to become one with the Father and the Son.” Discuss what everyone learned from this message. How can prayer be considered time spent with Heavenly Father?

Learn more

John 14:13–14 ; James 5:16 ; 2 Nephi 4:34–35

Russell M. Nelson, “ Ask, Seek, Knock ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2009, 81–84

David A. Bednar, “ Ask in Faith ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2008, 94–97

Neil L. Andersen, “ I Hear Him through Sincere Prayer and Reflection ,” Inspiration (blog), Dec. 27, 2021, ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Section 3

Heavenly Father Hears and Answers Your Prayers

Have you ever wondered if your prayers are heard by God? Heavenly Father always hears and answers our sincere prayers: “Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you” ( Matthew 7:7 ). But the Lord answers our prayers according to His will and timing (see Mosiah 7:33 ; Doctrine and Covenants 64:31–32 ).

“Prayer is the act by which the will of the Father and the will of the child are brought into correspondence with each other. The object of prayer is not to change the will of God but to secure for ourselves and for others blessings that God is already willing to grant but that are made conditional on our asking for them.”

Things to think about

What are the greatest desires of your heart? How might seeking to align your will with the will of God shape your desires and prayers?

Heavenly Father often answers our prayers through the Holy Ghost. Sometimes our prayers are answered when we read and study the scriptures. God also works through other people to provide the assistance or answers we seek. Read the following scripture passages to consider some of the ways that communication from God can come to you through the Holy Ghost: 1 Kings 19:12 ; Doctrine and Covenants 8:2–3 ; 11:11–14 . When have you recognized that God heard your prayers?

Activity for learning with others

With your group, list some of the ways we can use technology to communicate with others. Discuss the question “Why do we sometimes find it difficult to communicate effectively with our Heavenly Father?” Read 3 Nephi 14:7–11 together. What did Jesus Christ teach about Heavenly Father’s willingness to answer our prayers?

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 88:63–65 ; 112:10

Thomas S. Monson, “ Come unto Him in Prayer and Faith ,” Ensign , Mar. 2009, 5–9

“ Prayer ” (video), Gospel Library

Richard G. Scott, “ Learning to Recognize Answers to Prayer ,” Ensign , Nov. 1989, 30–32

James B. Martino, “ Turn to Him and Answers Will Come ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2015, 58–60

“ Are You Really There? ” (video), Gospel Library

Other Resources about Prayer

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for Teaching Children

Notes

Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Language of Prayer ,” Ensign , May 1993, 18.

Gospel Topics, “ Prayer ,” Gospel Library.

Carol F. McConkie, “ The Soul’s Sincere Desire ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2016, 25.

Bible Dictionary, “ Prayer .”
