Priesthood Blessing
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/priesthood-blessing-study-guide?lang=eng

“Priesthood Blessing,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Priesthood Blessing

Inviting God’s priesthood power into our lives

No matter our age or stage of life, each of us will feel an urgent need at times to be reminded of God’s love and receive divine guidance. Our Heavenly Father shares His love, wisdom, and power with us through important resources. Some ways we may receive personal direction and help from God can include the scriptures, the words of living prophets, our patriarchal blessing, and the companionship of the Holy Ghost.

Another way we can feel God ministering to our needs is by receiving a priesthood blessing. We can request a special priesthood blessing any time we experience uncertainty or sickness or whenever we desire extra spiritual help. President Henry B. Eyring taught, “The purpose for our receiving the priesthood is to allow us to bless people for the Lord, doing so in His name.” Administering blessings by the laying on of hands has been a pattern followed by Melchizedek Priesthood holders throughout all of history (see Genesis 48:14–15 ; Acts 8:14–17 ; Alma 6:1 ).

What Is a Priesthood Blessing?

A priesthood blessing is an ordinance in which an ordained Melchizedek Priesthood holder places his hands on a person’s head (see Numbers 27:18 ; Hebrews 6:1–2 ; Mormon 9:24 ) and pronounces words of counsel, comfort, or healing as directed by the Spirit. The fulfillment of these blessings comes according to God’s will and the person’s faith in Jesus Christ. A priesthood blessing is normally offered by a family member, ministering brother, or local Church leader, but it may be offered by any ordained Melchizedek Priesthood holder. A priesthood blessing given by the laying on of hands is an important way God extends His inspiration, comfort, and even healing power into our lives.

Topic overview: Laying On of Hands , Priesthood Blessing

Related gospel study guides: Melchizedek Priesthood , Covenants and Ordinances , Miracles

Section 1

Priesthood Holders Follow the Example of Jesus Christ When They Bless Others

Jesus Christ ministered to those in need with remarkable divine power (see, for example, Matthew 4:23–24 ; 3 Nephi 17:6–9 ). In New Testament times, He blessed others with forgiveness (see Luke 7:47–50 ), peace and protection (see Mark 4:38–39 ), and healing (see John 9:1–7 ). And because He knew He would not be with the people for long, he also gave His twelve disciples authority to bless others (see Matthew 10:1, 8 ; Moroni 2:1–3 ).

Today, worthy Melchizedek Priesthood holders exercise the same authority to bless others. By the laying on of hands, priesthood holders give a blessing according to the feelings and inspiration they receive from the Spirit (see 2 Nephi 4:12 ). A priesthood blessing is often provided at the request of a person in need. Blessings may be given to provide peace, comfort, healing, or counsel. Sometimes priesthood blessings can accompany a priesthood ordinance, such as during the naming and blessing of children, confirmation to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, or ordination to the priesthood.

Melchizedek Priesthood holders who provide blessings by the laying on of hands stand as representatives of Jesus Christ in ministering to others. Priesthood power is promised to those who live the principles of righteousness and draw close to God through repentance and obedience to His commandments (see Doctrine and Covenants 121:36 ).

Things to think about

When a Melchizedek Priesthood holder gives someone a blessing, he acts in the Lord’s name and with His power. Read Doctrine and Covenants 36:2 , paying attention to the implications of the Savior’s words in this verse. Then read this statement by President Harold B. Lee:

“The Lord here [in Doctrine and Covenants 36:2 ] is saying that when one of his authorized servants puts his hands by authority upon the head of one to be blessed, it is as though he himself was putting his hand on with them to perform that ordinance. So we begin to see how he manifests his power among men through his servants to whom He has committed the keys of authority.”

How does this scripture passage influence your perspective about priesthood blessings? What experiences have you had with the Spirit as you have received or provided a priesthood blessing?

Activities for learning with others

While we may tend to associate priesthood blessings with the people who provide them—men who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood—it is essential to remember that priesthood power comes only through Jesus Christ. Read Doctrine and Covenants 121:36–37, 41–46 as a group. What do you learn from these verses about what God expects of anyone who desires greater spiritual power? How can each of us better cultivate these characteristics in our lives?

Watch the video “ Sanctify Yourselves ” (4:37) as a group. Before you begin the video, invite group members to imagine themselves in the situation depicted as they watch. After watching the video, invite group members to share their thoughts. Why is seeking to be clean essential for any person needing heaven’s power?

Learn more

Genesis 48:14–15 ; Acts 6:5–6 ; 3 Nephi 17:18–24 ; Doctrine and Covenants 20:70

“ Performing Priesthood Ordinances and Blessings ,” General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , chapter 18, Gospel Library

Julie B. Beck, “ An Outpouring of Blessings ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2006, 11–13

“ Sanctify Yourselves ” (video), Gospel Library

Section 2

Priesthood Blessings for Healing the Sick

Jesus Christ ministered to God’s children in many meaningful ways while He lived on the earth. He demonstrated perfect love as He relieved the suffering of the sick and afflicted by healing them (see Matthew 8:16–17 ; Mosiah 3:5–6 ). He directed His disciples to go forth and heal the sick (see Matthew 10:1 ). The New Testament shows that this pattern of laying hands on the sick to heal them was followed in the ancient Church of Jesus Christ (see Acts 3:1–8 ; 9:12, 17 ; 28:8 ; James 5:14–15 ). Modern-day Melchizedek Priesthood holders follow this same pattern when they anoint the sick with consecrated oil and bless them by the laying on of hands (see Doctrine and Covenants 42:43–44 ; 66:9 ).

President Dallin H. Oaks reminded us: “As we exercise the undoubted power of the priesthood of God and as we treasure His promise that He will hear and answer the prayer of faith, we must always remember that faith and the healing power of the priesthood cannot produce a result contrary to the will of Him whose priesthood it is. This principle is taught in the revelation directing that the elders of the Church shall lay their hands upon the sick. The Lord’s promise is that ‘he that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed ’ ( D&C 42:48 ; emphasis added).”

Things to think about

How can you spiritually prepare yourself when seeking a healing blessing for yourself or others? As you consider this question, read James 5:15 ; Jacob 3:1 ; Alma 15:10–11 ; and Ether 12:12 . What does the phrase “prayer of faith” mean to you? What other important principles are found in these passages?

Being willing to trust God’s will is an important aspect of any prayer or priesthood blessing. Read Mosiah 4:9 . How can the principle taught by King Benjamin in this passage help you feel better prepared to accept God’s will?

Activity for learning with others

When someone is sick, we naturally desire to do all we can to help and relieve his or her suffering. Priesthood blessings and medical care are both important. Invite group members to read the following statement by President Dallin H. Oaks:

“I wish to speak … about healing the sick—by medical science, by prayers of faith, and by priesthood blessings. … Of course we don’t wait until all other methods are exhausted before we pray in faith or give priesthood blessings for healing. In emergencies, prayers and blessings come first. Most often we pursue all efforts simultaneously.”

Why is it important to combine our prayers of faith and priesthood blessings with seeking medical help?

Learn more

1 Kings 17:8–24 ; Matthew 8:5–13 ; Mark 5:25–34

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Healing the Sick ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2010, 47–50

Donald L. Hallstrom, “ Has the Day of Miracles Ceased? ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 88–90

“ Why Are People Anointed with Oil When They Receive a Priesthood Blessing? ,” Liahona , Mar. 2010, 44–45

Church History Topics, “ Healing ,” Gospel Library

Other Resources about Priesthood Blessings

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Henry B. Eyring, “ Bless in His Name ,” Liahona , May 2021, 68.

Harold B. Lee, “Be Secure in the Gospel of Jesus Christ,” Speeches of the Year (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1958), 6.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Healing the Sick ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2010, 50.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Healing the Sick ,” 47.
