Prophets
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/prophets-study-guide?lang=eng

“Prophets,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Prophets

Divinely called witnesses of Jesus Christ

In ancient times, God called ordinary, faithful men as prophets and authorized them to represent Him. He inspired those servants, spoke to them, and gave them His power to accomplish His work. One of the significant messages of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ is that we have living prophets on the earth today.

Because the Lord’s prophets have been commissioned to teach God’s children and direct His work, it is essential that we give heed to their words. Learning about the role of prophets can increase your confidence in their divine calling as the Lord’s servants and deepen your desire to trust in their counsel and direction. To those who follow the living prophet, God promises safety, protection, and even salvation and eternal life.

Who Are Prophets?

A prophet is a person who has been called by God to speak for Him (see Jeremiah 1:4–5 ; Amos 3:7 ; John 15:16 ; Doctrine and Covenants 1:37–38 ). Prophets testify of Jesus Christ and teach His gospel. They make known God’s will and true character. They denounce sin, warn of its consequences, and help us avoid deception (see Ezekiel 3:16–17 ; Ephesians 4:11–14 ). At times, they prophesy of future events. Prophets are able to perform these responsibilities because they receive authority, keys, and revelation from God.

Topic overview: Prophets

Related gospel study guides: Revelation , Joseph Smith , Priesthood Keys , The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Section 1

Jesus Christ Calls Prophets and Apostles in Our Day

Since the days of Adam, God has sent prophets among His children. During His mortal ministry, the Lord Jesus Christ organized His Church on the foundation of apostles and prophets (see Ephesians 2:19–20 ). God followed this same pattern in the latter days when He called the Prophet Joseph Smith, restored His Church, and established the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

The President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today is God’s prophet to all the people of the earth. We sustain the President of the Church as a prophet, seer, and revelator and as the only person on the earth who has God’s authority to exercise all priesthood keys. We also sustain the counselors in the First Presidency and the members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles as prophets, seers, and revelators.

Regarding the importance of apostles and prophets, the Prophet Joseph Smith observed: “The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it.”

Things to think about

The Prophet Joseph Smith was called by God to preach the restored gospel of Jesus Christ and help God’s children receive the priesthood ordinances needed for salvation and exaltation. His successors, including the President of the Church today, have received the same authority and responsibility to carry on as the Lord’s representatives. Read Doctrine and Covenants 107:91–92 . What does this passage indicate to you about the significant role of the Lord’s prophet in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?

Activity for learning with others

Members of the Church who seek to follow the Lord’s chosen servants are blessed. Invite members of your group to compare the truths taught in Helaman 13:24–28 and in 3 Nephi 12:1–2 . Why do some individuals respect past prophets but reject living prophets? What blessings have you recognized because we have living prophets and apostles on the earth today?

Learn more

Ezekiel 2:7 ; Luke 1:70 ; 6:12–13 ; 1 Nephi 22:2 ; 3 Nephi 20:24 ; Doctrine and Covenants 107:23

Russell M. Nelson, “ Sustaining the Prophets ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2014, 74–76

Section 2

We Follow Jesus Christ When We Give Heed to His Prophets

The Lord Jesus Christ has emphasized how important it is to receive His living prophets and apostles. We do so when we listen and give heed to their counsel. “He that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father’s kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him” ( Doctrine and Covenants 84:36–38 ).

God commands us to consider the words of His servants as if they were His own words. He declared, “Whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same” ( Doctrine and Covenants 1:38 ). Because God sends His prophets to teach and guide His children and prepare them for eternal life and exaltation, we will be protected and blessed when we give heed to Jesus Christ and His chosen servants (see Doctrine and Covenants 124:45–46 ).

Things to think about

President Russell M. Nelson explained: “It is precisely because [leaders of the Lord’s Church] care deeply about all of God’s children that we proclaim His truth. We may not always tell people what they want to hear. Prophets are rarely popular. But we will always teach the truth!” When has your willingness to trust the Lord’s prophet helped you recognize the truthfulness of his message?

The scriptures warn of false prophets who will arise in the last days and will attempt to deceive God’s children (see Matthew 24:24 ). The Lord explained that He will always raise up His prophets through the established pattern recognized in the Church. Read John 10:1–2 and Doctrine and Covenants 43:7 . What does it mean that the Lord’s servant will come in at the gate? How does knowing that revelation from God always comes through recognized priesthood channels help you avoid deception?

Activity for learning with others

Read the following statement by President Russell M. Nelson with members of your group: “Our sustaining of prophets is a personal commitment that we will do our utmost to uphold their prophetic priorities. Our sustaining is an oath-like indication that we recognize their calling as a prophet to be legitimate and binding upon us.” Read Doctrine and Covenants 107:22 . In what ways can we uphold the First Presidency through our “confidence, faith, and prayer[s]”?

Learn more

Matthew 10:40 ; 3 Nephi 28:34 ; Doctrine and Covenants 1:14 ; 112:20, 30–32

“ Chapter 11: Follow the Living Prophet ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 147–54

Section 3

The Role of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

Members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles hold the priesthood keys necessary to organize and direct the affairs of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (see Matthew 16:16–19 ; Doctrine and Covenants 81:1–2 ). The Lord promises that His power will accompany decisions made by the united voice of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. The General Handbook states: “All members of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles are prophets, seers, and revelators. Together they form the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Under the direction of the Lord and by unanimous voice, this council has authority to declare and interpret doctrine and establish policy for the Church (see Doctrine and Covenants 1:38 ; 107:27–31 ).”

Speaking of the First Presidency, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught: “The Presidents or [First] Presidency are over the Church; and revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church, are to come through the Presidency. This is the order of heaven, and the power and privilege of [the Melchizedek] Priesthood.”

While God gives revelation through prophets and apostles to guide His children, individuals can receive personal revelation to help them with their specific needs, responsibilities, and questions and to help strengthen their testimonies. Personal inspiration from the Lord will always align with the revelation God gives through His prophets.

Things to think about

The Apostle Paul explained that apostles and prophets are the foundation of the Church (see Ephesians 2:19–20 ). Read Ephesians 4:11–14 . How do the apostles and prophets of the Lord keep us from being “tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness”? ( verse 14 ).

Activity for learning with others

Read the following statement by Elder Neil L. Andersen with your group members:

“A few question their faith when they find a statement made by a Church leader decades ago that seems incongruent [inconsistent] with our doctrine. There is an important principle that governs the doctrine of the Church. The doctrine is taught by all 15 members of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve. It is not hidden in an obscure paragraph of one talk. True principles are taught frequently and by many. Our doctrine is not difficult to find.”

Invite group members to discuss how we can recognize true gospel principles and official Church doctrine.

Learn more

Amos 3:7 ; Doctrine and Covenants 124:125–26

Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Sure Witness of Modern Prophets ,” Liahona , Oct. 2023, 5–7

D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Doctrine of Christ ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2012, 86–89

Section 4

We Can Seek a Spiritual Confirmation of the Prophet’s Calling and Words

In the Old Testament, the Lord likened the role of His prophets to that of a “watchman” who had the responsibility to alert people of approaching danger (see Ezekiel 33:1–7 ). During His mortal ministry, Jesus Christ emphasized the need for repentance (see Matthew 4:17 ; 7:13–14 ; Luke 5:32 ). Prophets have the responsibility to declare the same message—warning God’s people about the consequences of sin and wickedness and teaching the need for repentance (see Acts 10:43 ; Doctrine and Covenants 1:4–5 ).

President Russell M. Nelson taught: “You may not always understand every declaration of a living prophet. But when you know a prophet is a prophet, you can approach the Lord in humility and faith and ask for your own witness about whatever His prophet has proclaimed.”

On the day the Church of Jesus Christ was organized, the Lord commanded His people to receive the words of His prophet “as if from [His] own mouth, in all patience and faith” (see Doctrine and Covenants 21:4–5 ). This divine instruction suggests that it will not always be easy to accept the words or teachings of a prophet. We may not immediately feel a spiritual confirmation of their importance. That is why the Lord reminds us to exercise patience and faith while we wait for clearer understanding. The Lord promised great blessings to those who will trust His prophets in patience and faith (see Doctrine and Covenants 21:6 ).

Things to think about

In the Old Testament, we read about Naaman—a captain of the Syrian king’s army. He suffered from a disease known as leprosy. He learned there was a prophet in Israel who had the power to heal, and Naaman travelled to meet him (see 2 Kings 5:1–9 ). Study 2 Kings 5:10–14 . Why was Naaman frustrated by the instructions delivered by the Lord’s prophet? What happened that led Naaman to finally heed the prophet’s words and be healed? How can you apply this story in your own life?

Activity for learning with others

Choosing to follow the counsel of the Lord’s prophets brings safety. With members of your group, read the following statement by President Henry B. Eyring:

“The choice not to take prophetic counsel changes the very ground upon which we stand. It becomes more dangerous. The failure to take prophetic counsel lessens our power to take inspired counsel in the future. …

“Every time in my life when I have chosen to delay following inspired counsel or decided that I was an exception, I came to know that I had put myself in harm’s way. Every time that I have listened to the counsel of prophets, felt it confirmed in prayer, and then followed it, I have found that I moved toward safety. Along the path, I have found that the way had been prepared for me and the rough places made smooth. God led me to safety along a path which was prepared with loving care, sometimes prepared long before.”

Invite group members to share ways they may have received increased safety and protection because they chose to follow a prophet’s counsel.

Learn more

Isaiah 55:8–9 ; Mormon 9:7–9 ; Articles of Faith 1:9

M. Russell Ballard, “ God Is at the Helm ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2015, 24–27

Other Resources about Prophets

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 49 .

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Love and Laws of God ” (Brigham Young University devotional, Sept. 17, 2019), 3, speeches.byu.edu .

Russell M. Nelson, “ Sustaining the Prophets ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2014, 75.

General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 5.1.1.1, Gospel Library .

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 197 .

Neil L. Andersen, “ Trial of Your Faith ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2012, 41.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Stand as True Millennials ,” Ensign , Oct. 2016, 31.

Henry B. Eyring, “ Finding Safety in Counsel ,” Ensign , May 1997, 24–26.
