Quorum
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/quorum?lang=eng

“Quorum,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Quorum

A priesthood quorum is an organized group of men or young men who hold the priesthood. Quorum members “serve others, fulfill priesthood duties, build unity, and learn and live doctrine.” 1 Quorums are organized for both the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthoods .

Melchizedek Priesthood Quorums

Apostles and Seventies are organized into quorums at the general Church level. The First Presidency is the Church’s highest governing body and presides over all the affairs of the Church. The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles is the second-highest governing body in the Church. Apostles are called to be “special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world.” 2 Seventies serve under the direction of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and are called to “preach the gospel, and to be especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world.” 3 Seventies are organized into quorums of General Authority Seventies and Area Seventies. General Authority Seventies serve throughout the world, and Area Seventies serve in their local areas.

Each stake has one high priests quorum. The stake president is the president of the quorum. He and his counselors are the presidency of that quorum. The stake high priests quorum consists of bishops and their counselors, high councilors, and functioning patriarchs . 4

Each ward has one or more elders quorums. An elders quorum includes all elders and prospective elders (men age 19 or older who do not hold the Melchizedek Priesthood) in the ward. It also includes high priests who are not currently serving in the callings that make up the high priests quorum.

Aaronic Priesthood Quorums

In each ward the bishop organizes the deacons —generally young men turning 12 or 13 during the year—into a quorum of up to 12 members. He organizes the teachers —generally young men turning 14 or 15 during the year—into a quorum of up to 24 members. And he organizes the priests —generally young men turning 16 or 17 during the year—into a quorum of up to 48 members. 5

If quorum membership increases beyond these numbers, the bishop may divide the quorum. Before doing so, he considers the effect on quorum members. 6

Quorum Leadership

Quorums are presided over by a president who is set apart to preside. The president is also given the priesthood keys necessary to fulfill the responsibilities of that calling. Quorums at the ward and stake levels generally include counselors called to support the president and to form a presidency.

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 8.1.1 .

Doctrine and Covenants 107:23 .

Doctrine and Covenants 107:25 .

See General Handbook , 6.2.1.1 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 107:85–87 .

See General Handbook , 10.1.5 .
