Racial and Cultural Prejudice
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/racial-prejudice?lang=eng

“Racial and Cultural Prejudice,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Racial and Cultural Prejudice

All individuals are children of God and part of His divine family. 1 As His children, we all have divine potential and are precious in His eyes. The scriptures teach that God “hath made of one blood all nations of men,” 2 and “all are alike” unto Him. 3 He does not love one race or culture more than any other.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is for all of God’s children. The Book of Mormon teaches that the Lord invites “all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female.” 4 Our standing with God depends on our devotion to Him and His commandments, not on the color of our skin, our ethnicity, or other attributes.

Because we are children of God, we are all brothers and sisters. God has commanded us to “love one another.” 5 In the parable of the good Samaritan, Jesus Christ taught that the commandment to love our neighbor transcends ethnic, cultural, and religious differences. 6 The Savior exemplified this teaching. He “went about doing good,” 7 teaching and healing people of all backgrounds.

Striving to follow the Savior’s teachings and example, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints condemns racial and cultural prejudice in any form. President Russell M. Nelson has taught: “The Creator of us all calls on each of us to abandon attitudes of prejudice against any group of God’s children. Any of us who has prejudice toward another race needs to repent!” 8

President Nelson also taught that Church members should “lead out in abandoning attitudes and actions of prejudice. I plead with you,” he said, “to promote respect for all of God’s children.” 9 When we understand “the true Fatherhood of God[,] … [t]hat understanding inspires us with passionate desire to build bridges of cooperation instead of walls of segregation.” 10

The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that a person “filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his [or her] family alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the whole human race.” 11 The Church and its members seek to follow this principle in all that they do, including sharing the gospel of Jesus Christ with all people, welcoming all to participate in Church services, and caring for those in need.

Related Content

Messages from Church leaders

Notes

See “ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library.

Acts 17:26 .

2 Nephi 26:33 .

2 Nephi 26:33 .

See John 13:34–35 .

See Luke 10:25–37 .

Acts 10:38 .

Russell M. Nelson, in “ President Nelson Shares Social Post about Racism and Calls for Respect for Human Dignity ,” June 1, 2020, newsroom.ChurchofJesusChrist.org .

Russell M. Nelson, “ Let God Prevail ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2020, 94.

Russell M. Nelson, “ ‘All Are Equal,’ Prophet Proclaims at ‘Be One’ Celebration ,” Church News, June 1, 2018, ChurchofJesusChrist.org ; see also General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 38.6.14 .

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 426 .
