Relief Society
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/relief-society?lang=eng

Overview

Relief Society

Overview

Relief Society is the women’s organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Its purpose is to help prepare women for the blessings of eternal life as they increase faith in Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and His Atonement; strengthen individuals, families, and homes through ordinances and covenants; and work in unity to help those in need.

All adult women in the Church are members of Relief Society. Through Relief Society, sisters “receive a vision and assurance of their identity as daughters of God” with lives of purpose and direction ( Daughters in My Kingdom: The History and Work of Relief Society [2011], 171 ). Sisters also increase their self-reliance, enlarge their talents, expand their knowledge, strengthen families, and reach out to those in need. These ministering, leadership, and teaching opportunities strengthen women in their efforts to become disciples of Jesus Christ.

The First Presidency stated, “We testify that the Lord has restored the fulness of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith and that Relief Society is an important part of that restoration” ( Daughters in My Kingdom, ix).

The Relief Society was organized in March 1842 by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It was originally called the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, and Emma Hale Smith, the wife of Joseph Smith, was selected as its first president. Shortly before Joseph Smith organized the Relief Society he explained that the sisters would be organized “after the pattern of the priesthood.” He also taught, “The Church was never perfectly organized until the women were thus organized” ( Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith [2007], 451).

“While little is known about a formal organization of women in the New Testament, evidence suggests that women were vital participants in the Savior’s ministry” ( Daughters in My Kingdom, 3 ). Paul wrote to the Roman Saints, saying, “I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea: that ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you: for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also” ( Romans 16:1–2 ).

Historical records of the Church in our dispensation describe the devotion of early Relief Society women as they bore testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ and served the sick and poor among them to build up the kingdom of God. Relief Society provided opportunities for Latter-day Saint women to expand their influence and to bless their families, wards, stakes, communities, and nations. Throughout its history, members of the organization have spoken up regarding relevant issues of their time. Relief Society continues to provide such opportunities for women today.

Record Your Impressions

Related Topics

Atonement of Jesus Christ

Covenant

Daughters in My Kingdom

Eternal Life

Family

Women in the Church

Scriptures

Scripture References

Luke 10:41–42

1 Corinthians 13

Moroni 7:45–47

Doctrine and Covenants 25:1, 13, 15–16

Doctrine and Covenants 88:118–19, 123–25

Doctrine and Covenants 138:56

Moses 1:39

Scripture Study Resources

Topical Guide, “ Charity ,” “ Eternal Life ”

Bible Dictionary, “ Charity ”

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Charity ,” “ Sons and Daughters of God ,” “ Woman, Women ”

Messages from Church Leaders

The Enduring Legacy of Relief Society

President Henry B. Eyring

The Mighty Strength of the Relief Society

President Thomas S. Monson

The Vision of Prophets regarding Relief Society: Faith, Family, Relief

Julie B. Beck

Relief Society: A Sacred Work

Julie B. Beck

Additional Messages

Videos

“Is Faith in the Atonement of Jesus Christ Written upon our Hearts?”

“Walk in His Light”

“Engaged in This Work”

“The Family Is Ordained of God”

“I Was a Stranger: Love One Another”

“Refuge from the Storm”

“Mother in Israel”

“Sisters in Zion”

“When We Were Strangers”

“Joseph Smith and the Organizing of the Relief Society”

“Learning and Teaching in the Home and the Church—The Church”

“Learning and Teaching in the Home and the Church—The Home”

Learning Resources

General Resources

Daughters in My Kingdom: The History and Work of Relief Society

“ The Work of Salvation in the Ward and Stake ,” Handbook 2, section 5

“ Relief Society ,” Handbook 2, section 9

“ I Was a Stranger—An Effort to Serve and Include ,” IWasAStranger.ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“ The Work and Purpose of Relief Society ,” ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“ Relief Society Callings ,” ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“ The First Fifty Years of Relief Society ,” The Church Historian’s Press

“ Nauvoo Relief Society Minute Book ,” The Joseph Smith Papers

Church Magazines

“ An Outpouring of the Spirit ,” Ensign or Liahona, March 2017

Maryssa Dennis, “ Junior Relief Society ,” Friend, March 2017

“ The Purpose of Relief Society ,” Ensign or Liahona, January 2017

“ Progression into Relief Society ,” Ensign or Liahona, March 2016

“ More Alike Than Different ,” Ensign or Liahona, March 2016

In the News

“ Charity Helps Us Become What We Are ‘Supposed to Be,’ ” Church News

“ ‘Hearts Knit Together’—Ward Combines to Strengthen Families ,” Church News

“ Women’s Divine Roles Include Nurturing Others ,” Church News

“ Relief Society Presidency ,” Newsroom

“ Relief Society History ,” Newsroom

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“Relief Society: Divine Organization of Women”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith, chapter 39

“The Relief Society and Individual Responsibility”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young, chapter 19

“Relief Society: True Charity and Pure Religion”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Lorenzo Snow, chapter 13

“The Influence of Mothers”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith, chapter 4

“Relief Society: Divinely Organized for the Good of the Saints”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith, chapter 21

“The Work of Latter-day Saint Women: ‘Unselfish Devotion to This Glorious Cause’”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Fielding Smith, chapter 24

“The Righteous Influence of Mothers”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Harold B. Lee, chapter 15

“The Women of the Church”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Spencer W. Kimball, chapter 20

“Priceless Blessings of the House of the Lord”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson, chapter 13

Daughters of God

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Gordon B. Hinckley, chapter 5

Media

Audio

Gospel Solutions for Families, Latter-day Saints Channel

Music

“Our Savior’s Love,” Hymns, no. 113

“Because I Have Been Given Much,” Hymns, no. 219

“Lord, I Would Follow Thee,” Hymns, no. 220

“Each Life That Touches Ours for Good,” Hymns, no. 293

“I Am a Child of God,” Hymns, no. 301

“As Sisters in Zion,” Hymns, no. 309

“A Key Was Turned in Latter Days (Women),” Hymns, no. 310

“We Meet Again as Sisters (Women),” Hymns, no. 311

“Sweet Is the Work,” Hymns, no. 147

“He Sent His Son,” Children’s Songbook, 34

“Love One Another,” Children’s Songbook, 136

“I Will Follow God’s Plan,” Children’s Songbook, 164
