Repentance
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/repentance-study-guide?lang=eng

“Repentance,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Repentance

Growing and improving through the love and mercy of Jesus Christ

Heavenly Father loves us. More than anything else, He wants us to return to Him. But our sins and imperfections separate us from God. They keep us from returning to live in His presence and from becoming like Him. Still, there is hope. Because Father in Heaven loves us so much, He sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to save us. Christ willingly took upon Himself our sins and imperfections so we can be forgiven, continue to grow, and eventually return to live with our Father in Heaven. This great gift is called the Atonement of Jesus Christ. We begin to receive the blessings of Christ’s Atonement as we exercise faith in Him and repent of our sins.

What Is Repentance?

Repentance is a change of mind and heart—a turning away from sin and returning to God. It is prompted when we experience godly sorrow for having sinned (see 2 Corinthians 7:9–11 ). When we repent, we honestly admit our faults and our sins, we do what we can to correct them, we strive to make all the necessary changes we can, and we humbly rely on the Savior’s power to change what we cannot. Sincere repentance can happen as we exercise faith in Jesus Christ and His ability to make us clean.

Topic overview: Repentance

Related gospel study guides: Faith in Jesus Christ , Atonement of Jesus Christ , Sacrament , Obedience

Section 1

Cleansed through Repentance: “How Is It Done?”

In the Book of Mormon, the prophet Enos described the “wrestle which [he] had before God” as he sought forgiveness of his sins. When at last his “guilt was swept away,” he asked something that perhaps you have wondered: “Lord, how is it done?” Read about his experience in Enos 1:1–8 . How was Enos changed? What do you learn from the way he described his repentance?

Of course, the only way to fully understand repentance is to experience it. As you repent and feel the peace and joy of forgiveness, consider writing about your experience. You may even feel inspired to share it with a family member or friend.

Things to think about

How do we access the Savior’s cleansing power in our lives? You can find answers to this question in President Dallin H. Oaks’s message “ Cleansed by Repentance .” Think about the teachings found in the first section, titled “Repentance,” in particular. Ponder what the Lord wants you to do to receive forgiveness of your sins.

Explore what the Savior has said about His atoning sacrifice for us in 3 Nephi 9:13–14 and Doctrine and Covenants 19:16–19 . What messages might the Lord have for you, specifically, in His words?

Notice the words and phrases that describe forgiveness in Jeremiah 33:6–9 ; Alma 5:21 . What do these words and phrases suggest to you about repentance and forgiveness of sin?

Activity for learning with others

The prophet Isaiah spoke of washing and cleansing when he taught about repentance. Consider reading Isaiah 1:16–18 as a family while cleaning something together, such as clothing or dishes. What makes it possible for these things to become clean? What makes it possible for us to become clean spiritually—or cleansed from our sins? (see 3 Nephi 27:19–20 ).

You might also compare how it feels to be cleansed physically with how it feels to be forgiven of our sins.

Learn more

1 John 1:7–9 ; Mosiah 4:1–12

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ He Will Place You on His Shoulders and Carry You Home ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2016, 101–4

Section 2

Repentance Means Change—and It’s for Everyone

The scriptures give many examples of people who seemed unlikely candidates for change but who, through the power of Jesus Christ, repented and became righteous. The Apostle Paul, many of the Lamanites, and Alma the Younger all experienced a dramatic, stunning change of heart. They turned away from sin and toward the Savior, allowing Him to transform their lives. Sometimes this change seems to happen suddenly; more often it’s a gradual transformation. Either way, it’s a miracle that Jesus Christ offers to all who repent. And it’s a miracle we all need, “for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God” ( Romans 3:23 ).

Things to think about

Study the examples of repentance in Acts 22:3–21 (about Paul); Alma 24:6–19 (about a group of Lamanites); and Alma 36 (about Alma the Younger). What did these people do to repent? Why is it valuable to read their experiences? Ponder and record what you learn.

What changes do you feel inspired to make in your own life? As you ponder this, study James 4:17 ; Mosiah 4:29–30 ; Alma 5:26 ; and President Russell M. Nelson’s message “ We Can Do Better and Be Better .” How do you feel the Lord wants you to improve and grow?

Activities for learning with others

The world is full of examples of impressive change—a tiny seed that becomes a large tree, a caterpillar that becomes a butterfly, an egg that becomes an eagle. You or your family could examine some of these examples and read 2 Corinthians 5:17 . This could lead to a conversation about the change that is possible through Jesus Christ.

Young children might enjoy learning about repentance from Book of Mormon Stories, such as from the examples in “ Chapter 18: Alma the Younger Repents ” and “ Chapter 26: The People of Ammon .” How did the Savior help these people change?

You could also make a list of some of the attributes of Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ (the hymn “ More Holiness Give Me ” mentions several). In what ways can we change to become more like Them? How do They help us do that?

Learn more

1 Nephi 10:6 ; Mosiah 5:2 ; Alma 5:14 ; Moses 6:57

Larry R. Lawrence, “ What Lack I Yet? ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2015, 33–35

Section 3

Repentance Is Joyful

Because change can be hard, sometimes we might feel afraid of repentance. Maybe we think it’s something miserable or depressing or impossibly difficult. But Heavenly Father’s plan is a plan of happiness. Through repenting, we can become more kind, loving, patient, humble, and joyful.

Sin brings misery—repentance is the way we escape that misery.

Things to think about

Think about the following scriptures that teach how joyful repentance can be: Mosiah 4:1–3 ; Alma 36:17–21 ; Doctrine and Covenants 18:10–16 . Then record your feelings. When you need encouragement to repent, you could review these scriptures and the feelings you recorded.

You might also study Elder Dale G. Renlund’s message “ Repentance: A Joyful Choice ” or watch the related video . What do you think makes repentance and forgiveness joyful?

Activities for learning with others

You might watch one or both of these videos with others to learn more about the joy of repentance: “ The Shiny Bicycle ” (3:04) and “ The Goal: A Story of Faith, Friendship, and Forgiveness ” (7:27). As you watch the videos, look for (1) things that made the person in the video sad and (2) things that made the person happy. You could also look for these things in the parables in Luke 15 .

Or you could talk about a time when someone recovered from a sickness or injury and compare that experience to repentance. Read 3 Nephi 9:13–14 , and talk about the joy we feel when the Savior heals us spiritually as we repent. What might we say to help someone who feels afraid to repent?

Learn more

Alma 13:21–22 ; 22:13–16 ; Doctrine and Covenants 76:40–42

D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Divine Gift of Repentance ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2011, 38–41

Other Resources about Repentance

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Cleansed by Repentance ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 91–94.

Russell M. Nelson, “ We Can Do Better and Be Better ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 67–69.

Book of Mormon Stories (1997), 49–52 .

Book of Mormon Stories , 73–74 .

“ More Holiness Give Me ,” Hymns , no. 131.

Dale G. Renlund, “ Repentance: A Joyful Choice ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2016, 121–24.

“ Repentance: A Joyful Choice ” (video), Gospel Library.
