Restoration of the Gospel
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/restoration-of-the-church-study-guide?lang=eng

“Restoration of the Gospel,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Restoration of the Gospel

The fulness of Jesus Christ’s gospel in our day

Soon after His baptism, Jesus Christ began His ministry teaching people how to live according to Heavenly Father’s plan. Jesus taught that there are two great commandments: first, to love God with all our heart, mind, and strength; and, second, to love others as we love ourselves (see Matthew 22:36–40 ). His message was to invite men and women to come unto Him, believe and live the truths of His gospel, and be saved.

Jesus called Apostles and gave them authority to represent Him and assist in His work. He organized His Church and emphasized the importance of the first principles and ordinances of the gospel: faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost (see Matthew 9:13 ; 16:15–19 ; 17:19–20 ; John 3:5 ).

Over time following the deaths of the Lord’s Apostles, many important gospel truths were changed or lost, as well as the original organization and authority of Christ’s Church (see Acts 20:29–30 ). But in fulfilment of prophecy, Heavenly Father and His Son Jesus Christ restored, or reestablished, the Church and the fulness of the gospel. This Restoration began in 1820 through the Prophet Joseph Smith. It continues today through divine revelation given to modern prophets.

What Is the Restoration of the Gospel?

The “Restoration of the gospel” refers to Jesus Christ restoring the fulness of His gospel, priesthood authority, and the organization of His Church to the earth through the Prophet Joseph Smith and later prophets. The Restoration is characterized by a series of divine revelations, beginning with Joseph Smith’s First Vision and continuing through modern prophets to this day.

Topic overview: Restoration of the Church

Related gospel study guides: Joseph Smith , Prophets , First Vision , Restoration of the Priesthood , Book of Mormon , The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Section 1

The World Was Prepared for the Restoration of the Gospel

After Christ’s Apostles died, many important aspects of Jesus Christ’s gospel were misunderstood, faded away, or were changed. Without living prophets and the original authority given by Jesus Christ, the true Church of Jesus Christ ceased to exist. During this time, which is sometimes called the Great Apostasy, many people sought a true understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Many events helped prepare the world for the Restoration of the Lord’s gospel and His Church. For example, key individuals sacrificed much, including their lives, to translate the Bible into English and begin its distribution to others. The availability of the scriptures made it easier for people to learn more about Jesus Christ. Reformers spoke out against the discrepancies they saw in the church with what the scriptures taught. Many Europeans sought religious freedom by settling in North America. Countless people were seeking a clearer understanding of Jesus Christ and how to find peace in this life.

Things to think about

Many important aspects of Jesus Christ’s gospel were lost after His Apostles died. This era of falling away from the true gospel is sometimes called the Great Apostasy. Read Isaiah 24:4–5 ; Matthew 24:9–12 ; John 16:1–3 ; 2 Thessalonians 2:1–4 ; and 1 Nephi 13:26–29 . What do these passages say would happen after Christ and His Apostles were gone? How has the Restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ influenced your life?

Read Joseph Smith’s account of his First Vision found in Joseph Smith—History 1:14–20 . What did Joseph Smith learn about the condition of the religious world around him? Why is it important to gain a testimony of the truthfulness of the Restoration of the gospel?

Activities for learning with others

Invite group members to describe what it feels like to be hungry. How can hunger affect our mood? our priorities? our desires? After this discussion, read Amos 8:11–12 together. Why do you think the prophet Amos chose this imagery to describe the world during the Great Apostasy? How is a loss of gospel truth similar to “a famine in the land”? How would our lives be affected if we hungered for spiritual truths in the same way we hunger for food?

In his talk “ Preparations for the Restoration and the Second Coming: ‘My Hand Shall Be over Thee’ ,” Elder Robert D. Hales outlined several specific events in world history that helped prepare the world for the Restoration. Listen to or read this talk together, and then invite group members to share what they learned. How was the hand of the Lord evident in the events leading up to the Restoration?

Learn more

2 Thessalonians 2:1–4

“ The Restoration of the Fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: A Bicentennial Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library

D. Todd Christofferson, “ Sharing the Message of the Restoration and the Resurrection ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 110–13

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Gordon B. Hinckley (2016), 43–53

Section 2

The Restoration of the Gospel Opened the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

The Restoration of Jesus Christ’s gospel brought new light into the world. It began in the spring of 1820, when young Joseph Smith prayed in a grove near his home in Palmyra, New York. He was concerned about his spiritual standing before God and wanted to know which church was right. In answer to his prayer, God the Father and Jesus Christ appeared to him.

Over the course of time, God began to restore gospel truth to Joseph Smith. This outpouring of truth brought scriptures, priesthood authority, Church organization, doctrine, and essential ordinances of salvation and exaltation. This process of dispensing the gospel once again to the earth brought about what the scriptures call the “dispensation of the fulness of times” ( Ephesians 1:10 ; Doctrine and Covenants 112:30 ). A dispensation is a time when the Lord has a prophet and His gospel on the earth. In this final dispensation of the gospel, the world is being prepared for the Second Coming of Jesus Christ.

Things to think about

We live in the dispensation of the fulness of times—a time unlike any other. We know this dispensation will not end in apostasy, but that doesn’t mean we don’t face significant challenges. Study Elder Jeffrey R. Holland’s message “ This, the Greatest of All Dispensations .” What challenges does Elder Holland identify in this message? What do you learn from his message about the attitude you can choose to have as you face these challenges?

An exciting part of living in the dispensation of the fulness of times is being part of the ongoing Restoration of the gospel. Read Acts 3:19–21 ; Ephesians 1:3, 10 ; Doctrine and Covenants 27:13 ; 112:30 ; 128:18 . What do you learn from these verses about what will happen during this dispensation? How can you contribute to this great work?

Activities for learning with others

Seeking and believing in continuing revelation can have a significant effect on your life. In “ The Restoration of the Fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: A Bicentennial Proclamation to the World ,” the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles stated: “Two hundred years have now elapsed since this Restoration was initiated by God the Father and His Beloved Son, Jesus Christ. … We gladly declare that the promised Restoration goes forward through continuing revelation.” Ask group members to share modern revelations or inspired teachings that have had a significant impact on them. What do you learn from group members’ experiences with modern revelation?

The concept of dispensations can be difficult to understand. Watch the video “ Dispensations: The Pattern of Apostasy and Restoration ” (6:52) together, stopping as needed to ask each other questions and find answers. How does understanding the pattern of dispensations strengthen your testimony of the Restoration in our day? How do you feel about living in the dispensation of the fulness of times?

Learn more

Daniel 2:35, 44–45 ; Doctrine and Covenants 65:2

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ At the Summit of the Ages ,” Ensign , Nov. 1999, 72–74

Faith Sutherlin Blackhurst, “ What, Why, and How: A Breakdown of the Restoration ,” Liahona , Apr. 2018, 58–61

Section 3

The Restoration Continues through Modern Prophets and Apostles

Now, more than 200 years after Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ appeared to Joseph Smith, the Restoration continues. Living prophets and apostles seek and receive revelation to direct The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Lord is preparing His Church and His people for the Second Coming of Jesus Christ. God’s work continues to roll forward through the ongoing Restoration and the inspired leadership of the Lord’s servants (see Articles of Faith 1:9 ).

In 2018, President Russell M. Nelson said: “We’re witnesses to a process of restoration. If you think the Church has been fully restored, you’re just seeing the beginning. There is much more to come. … Wait till next year. And then the next year. Eat your vitamin pills. Get your rest. It’s going to be exciting.”

Things to think about

In his 2014 address “ Are You Sleeping through the Restoration? ” President Dieter F. Uchtdorf, then of the First Presidency, suggested three temptations that can prevent us from actively participating in the ongoing Restoration of the gospel. Study this talk, paying attention to the stumbling blocks he says could prevent us from reaching our potential. Which of these could you work on overcoming? Make a plan to do so.

Some people who witnessed many of the events of the Restoration were inspired to write about them. Choose a hymn from the “ Restoration of the Gospel ” topic page in Hymns , and read its lyrics. What do the words teach you about the significance of the Restoration? How do these words make you feel? What do you feel inspired to do?

Activities for learning with others

In a 2020 address entitled “ Fulfillment of Prophecy ,” Elder Ronald A. Rasband listed several ancient and modern prophecies that have been fulfilled as part of the Restoration of the gospel. Study this talk together, and then invite group members to share which fulfillments of prophecy are most meaningful to them. How does this exercise change the way you think about the Restoration? How do you feel when you consider the significance of living in this long-anticipated time?

In the article “ The Ongoing Restoration ,” Elder LeGrand R. Curtis Jr., Church Historian and Recorder, listed three ways we can participate in the ongoing Restoration:

Make and keep sacred covenants

Fulfill the callings and assignments we receive

Help gather Israel

As a group, read what Elder Curtis taught about each of these contributions to the work. Which do you feel impressed to participate in at this time? How will you do so? Share your ideas with the group, and identify ways you can help each other reach your goals.

Learn more

Revelation 14:6–7 ; Doctrine and Covenants 1:17–30 ; 43:28 ; Articles of Faith 1:6, 9

Gary E. Stevenson, “ The Ongoing Restoration ” (Brigham Young University Campus Education Week address, Aug. 20, 2019), speeches.byu.edu

Other Resources about the Restoration of the Gospel

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Resources for children

Notes

Robert D. Hales, “ Preparations for the Restoration and the Second Coming: ‘My Hand Shall Be over Thee ,’” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2005, 88–92.

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ This, the Greatest of All Dispensations ,” Liahona , July 2007, 19–24.

“ The Restoration of the Fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: A Bicentennial Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library.

Russell M. Nelson, in “Latter-day Saint Prophet, Wife and Apostle Share Insights of Global Ministry,” Oct. 30, 2018, newsroom.ChurchofJesusChrist.org.

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ Are You Sleeping through the Restoration? ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2014, 58–62.

Ronald A. Rasband, “ Fulfillment of Prophecy ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 75–78.

LeGrand R. Curtis Jr., “ The Ongoing Restoration ,” Ensign , Apr. 2020, 20–25.
