Resurrection
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/resurrection?lang=eng

“Resurrection,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Resurrection

Resurrection is the reuniting of the spirit with the body in an immortal state, no longer subject to disease or death. Because of the Fall of Adam and Eve , we are subject to physical death , which is the separation of the spirit from the body. Through the Atonement of Jesus Christ , all people will be resurrected and saved from physical death. 1

The Savior was the first person on this earth to be resurrected. The New Testament contains several accounts testifying that He rose from the tomb. 2

When the resurrected Lord appeared to His Apostles , He helped them understand that He had a body of flesh and bones. He said, “Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.” 3 He also appeared to the Nephites after His Resurrection. 4

At the time of the Resurrection, we will “be judged according to [our] works. … We shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.” 5 The eternal glory we receive will depend on our faithfulness. Although all people will be resurrected, only those who have come unto Christ and partaken of the fulness of His gospel will inherit exaltation in the celestial kingdom.

An understanding and testimony of the Resurrection can give us hope and perspective as we experience the challenges, trials, and triumphs of life. We can find comfort in the assurance that the Savior lives and that through His Atonement, “he breaketh the bands of death, that the grave shall have no victory, and that the sting of death should be swallowed up in the hopes of glory.” 6

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Gospel Study Guide

Resources for children

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

See 1 Corinthians 15:22 .

See Matthew 28:1–8 ; Mark 16:1–14 ; Luke 24:1–48 ; John 20:1–29 ; 1 Corinthians 15:1–8 ; 2 Peter 1:16–17 .

Luke 24:39 .

See 3 Nephi 11:10–17 .

Alma 11:41, 43 .

Alma 22:14 .
