Resurrection
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/resurrection-study-guide?lang=eng

“Resurrection,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Resurrection

Jesus Christ’s victory over death

At some point in our lives, each of us will have occasion to wonder, “What happens when we die?” “Will I ever see my deceased loved ones again?” “Where can I find peace when someone I love dies?”

While we don’t have all the answers, the truth of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ can bring comfort to all who mourn. The fact that all who die will one day live again brings peace to our souls and promises that better days are ahead.

In rising from death to immortality, Jesus Christ became the “firstfruits” of the Resurrection (see 1 Corinthians 15:20–23 ) and provided a way for all of us to one day be resurrected as He was.

What Is Resurrection?

Resurrection is the reuniting of the spirit body and the physical body after death, never to be separated again (see Alma 11:45 ). When we are resurrected, our bodies will be perfected and immortal, no longer subject to disease and death. Because Jesus Christ overcame death through His Resurrection, all people will be resurrected as He was.

Topic overview: Resurrection

Related gospel study guides: Atonement of Jesus Christ , Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ , Plan of Salvation

Section 1

Jesus Christ Was Resurrected

Jesus Christ was the first to be resurrected. His victory over death is foundational to our faith. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, “The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven.”

The Lord has provided multiple testimonies of this essential doctrine. Each of the four Gospels includes accounts of those who witnessed Jesus as a resurrected being. The Book of Mormon also testifies that thousands of people in the Americas saw the risen Savior. In modern times, witnesses including Joseph Smith and other prophets and apostles have testified that Jesus Christ was resurrected and lives today.

Things to think about

Imagine you are a lawyer building a case to prove that Jesus Christ was resurrected. Who would you call as witnesses? How would eyewitnesses strengthen your case? How can the testimony of eyewitnesses of the resurrected Lord affect your own? For ideas, see John 20:1–20 ; 3 Nephi 11:3–17 ; and Doctrine and Covenants 76:19–24 .

Read John 20:26–29 . What message does the Savior give in this passage to people who are not eyewitnesses of His Resurrection? (See also Ether 12:5–6 .) Even if we haven’t seen the resurrected Lord, we can still receive a personal witness that He has risen. What evidence of the Resurrection have you experienced in your life? How has this evidence influenced you?

Activities for learning with others

President Gordon B. Hinckley (1910–2008) declared: “Of all the victories in human history, none is so great, none so universal in its effect, none so everlasting in its consequences as the victory of the crucified Lord who came forth in the Resurrection that first Easter morning.” Discuss why it’s important to know that Jesus Christ lives today. President Hinckley also wrote the words to the hymn “ My Redeemer Lives .” Read or listen to this hymn together, and then share the thoughts and feelings it inspires in you.

Many inspired artists have depicted the moment when individuals saw the risen Savior. Look at the following depictions or others you like. Share what these images help you understand about Jesus Christ’s Resurrection. How do they make you feel about Him? How might you have felt if you had been there?

Learn more

Matthew 27:52–53 ; Matthew 28 ; Luke 24:13–43 ; 1 Corinthians 15:1–8 ; 2 Nephi 9:3–7, 13–15 ; Helaman 14:14–17 ; 3 Nephi 23:6–14

D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Resurrection of Jesus Christ ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2014, 111–14

“ The Atonement and Resurrection of Jesus Christ ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Howard W. Hunter (2015), 99–110.

Robert J. Matthews, “ Resurrection, ” Liahona , Apr. 1996, ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“ Jesus Is Resurrected ” (video), Gospel Library

“ Chapter 54: Jesus Is Risen ,” New Testament Stories , 139–44

Section 2

We Will All Be Resurrected

Because Jesus Christ was resurrected, we will all be resurrected too. Shortly after Jesus Christ’s Resurrection, many faithful people were also resurrected (see Matthew 27:52–53 ). While everyone will not be resurrected at the same time, all will eventually receive a perfected, immortal body through the glorious gift of universal resurrection.

Our resurrected bodies will be similar to the bodies we have now, only immortal, perfect—free from sickness and pain. We will “receive a fulness of joy” ( Doctrine and Covenants 93:33–34 ; see also Alma 11:43 ). Our resurrected bodies will enable us to return to God’s presence and be judged. Those who have repented of their sins will enjoy eternal life and live forever in God’s presence.

Things to think about

Alma the Younger’s son Corianton was “worried concerning the resurrection of the dead” ( Alma 40:1 ). So Alma taught Corianton—and readers of the Book of Mormon—many significant truths regarding the Resurrection. Read what he taught in Alma 40–41 . As you read, take note of truths about the Resurrection that are significant to you. How might these truths have helped Corianton feel peace? How can they influence the decisions you are making now?

The Apostle Paul learned that some Saints in Corinth did not believe in the Resurrection. Read 1 Corinthians 15 , paying special attention to Paul’s teachings about the Resurrection. Here are some questions to ponder as you study:

Verses 12–15 : Why would preaching and faith be vain if there were no resurrection?

Verses 16–19 : Why would we be “yet in [our] sins” if there were no resurrection? Why would we be “most miserable”?

Verses 55–58 : How does your knowledge of the Resurrection help make you “steadfast” and “unmoveable”?

Activity for learning with others

The restored gospel of Jesus Christ teaches that the gift of resurrection is given unconditionally to all people, yet many of God’s children are unaware of this blessing. Discuss how the Resurrection makes a difference in your life. You might also find it valuable to discuss the personal experiences of Sister Reyna I. Aburto in her talk “ The Grave Has No Victory ” and Elder S. Mark Palmer in “ Our Sorrow Shall Be Turned into Joy .” How were Sister Aburto and Elder Palmer blessed by a knowledge of the Resurrection? How can this knowledge bless us?

Learn more

1 Peter 1:3–5 ; Mosiah 15:19–25 ; 16:7–9 ; Alma 11:40–45

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Resurrection ,” Ensign , May 2000, 14–16

“ Death and Resurrection: From Hopeless Dawn to Joyful Morning ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Thomas S. Monson (2020), 113–22.

“ Finding Hope through the Resurrection of Christ ” (video), Gospel Library

Other Resources about the Resurrection

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 49.

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ The Empty Tomb Bore Testimony ,” Ensign , May 1988, 66.

“ My Redeemer Lives ,” Hymns , no. 135.

Reyna I. Aburto, “ The Grave Has No Victory ,” Liahona , May 2021, 85–86.

S. Mark Palmer, “ Our Sorrow Shall Be Turned into Joy ,” Liahona , May 2021, 88–89.
