Revelation
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/revelation-study-guide?lang=eng

“Revelation,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Revelation

Daily, individual guidance from a loving Heavenly Father

Questions and uncertainty are common parts of life. Whom you turn to for answers and reassurance is extremely important. Fortunately, God is there to help in your search for answers and understanding. You can trust in the promise that “if … you lack wisdom,” you can ask Him for help and “it shall be given [you]” ( James 1:5 ).

God speaks to His children individually with personal revelation through the Holy Ghost. He has provided prophets and other people and resources to guide us through the challenges and experiences of this life. One of the most essential is the promised communication that can come to us from God through the Holy Ghost.

What Is Revelation?

Revelation is the divine guidance and communication our loving Heavenly Father provides to His children. It is often experienced as quiet feelings or thoughts described as the “still small voice” of the Holy Ghost ( Doctrine and Covenants 85:6 ). We increase our ability to receive and recognize personal revelation when we turn to God in prayer, study the holy scriptures, and seek to be obedient to God’s commandments. The Lord directs His Church through revelation that He gives to His authorized servants. Additionally, each of us can receive personal revelation to help us with specific needs, responsibilities, and questions.

Topic overview: Revelation

Related gospel study guides: Gift of the Holy Ghost , Prayer , Scriptures , Truth

Section 1

God Can Communicate with You through Personal Revelation

God loves you and knows perfectly the challenges and trials you face; He hasn’t left you alone (see John 14:18 ). You can take important steps to prepare yourself to receive and recognize personal revelation. Spiritual preparation includes studying the scriptures, worshipping on the Sabbath day and in the house of the Lord, repenting daily, fasting, and praying sincerely. The Lord promises He will guide you if you seek to draw near to Him (see Doctrine and Covenants 88:63 ).

President Russell M. Nelson taught:

“Find a quiet place where you can regularly go. Humble yourself before God. Pour out your heart to your Heavenly Father. Turn to Him for answers and for comfort.

“Pray in the name of Jesus Christ about your concerns, your fears, your weaknesses—yes, the very longings of your heart. And then listen! Write the thoughts that come to your mind. Record your feelings and follow through with actions that you are prompted to take. …

“Nothing opens the heavens quite like the combination of increased purity, exact obedience, earnest seeking, daily feasting on the words of Christ in the Book of Mormon, and regular time committed to temple and family history work.”

Things to think about

Every one of God’s children comes to this world with the Light of Christ. Read Moroni 7:16–18 ; Doctrine and Covenants 84:46–48 ; 93:2 , looking for what this gift includes and why it is essential.

Your desire to seek the spirit of revelation may increase when you better understand God’s willingness to share it with you. Compare the following scripture passages to find principles that can prepare you to experience the spirit of revelation: 1 Nephi 10:17–19 ; 2 Nephi 32:3 ; Doctrine and Covenants 9:8 ; Joseph Smith—History 1:10–17 . What principles of personal revelation are taught in these scriptures? Why is it valuable to recognize that we have a responsibility to prepare ourselves to receive personal revelation?

Activity for learning with others

In a January 2021 Liahona article titled “ Grow into the Principle of Revelation ,” President Russell M. Nelson discusses how we can better understand how to invite Heavenly Father’s guidance into our lives. Invite members of your group to study portions of the article. Talk together about the following questions: What are the principles President Nelson emphasizes? What do you feel inspired to do differently after reading this message?

Learn more

Alma 5:43–48 ; Doctrine and Covenants 50:24–25 ; 76:5–10 ; 84:44–47 ; 121:26–33

Dale G. Renlund, “ A Framework for Personal Revelation ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 16–18

Julie B. Beck, “ And upon the Handmaids in Those Days Will I Pour Out My Spirit ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2010, 10–12

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: John Taylor (2011), 153–61

Section 2

Personal Revelation Generally Comes as Impressions, Thoughts, and Feelings

Have you ever learned phrases in a new language? With study and practice, you can begin to recognize those words when they are spoken by others in conversation. In a similar way, you may not always recognize the voice of the Spirit at first, but learning important principles can prepare you to better understand divine communication. For example, the Old Testament prophet Elijah witnessed a strong wind, an earthquake, and a fire, but Elijah noted that “the Lord was not in” those things. But then he heard “a still small voice” and recognized it as the voice of the Lord (see 1 Kings 19:11–13 ). God speaks to us with a “still small voice” (see Helaman 5:28–30 ) and with feelings such as peace, comfort, and joy (see Galatians 5:22–23 ).

Another principle of revelation is that God “give[s] unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little” ( 2 Nephi 28:30 ). This means that God doesn’t give us everything at once. Rather, personal revelation can unfold over time.

Elder David A. Bednar highlighted this concept: “We as members of the Church tend to emphasize marvelous and dramatic spiritual manifestations so much that we may fail to appreciate and may even overlook the customary pattern by which the Holy Ghost accomplishes His work. The very ‘simpleness of the way’ ( 1 Nephi 17:41 ) of receiving small and incremental spiritual impressions that over time and in totality constitute a desired answer or the direction we need may cause us to look ‘beyond the mark’ ( Jacob 4:14 ).”

Things to think about

In his April 2020 general conference address “ Hear Him ,” President Nelson said, “It has never been more imperative to know how the Spirit speaks to you than right now. … I renew my plea for you to do whatever it takes to increase your spiritual capacity to receive personal revelation.” In what ways have you experienced personal revelation?

Activity for learning with others

In the three-part video series Patterns of Light , Elder David A. Bednar discusses how we can better understand personal revelation. Watch one or more of the videos together as a group. Invite group members to share how these messages help them view personal revelation with greater clarity. You may also want to review Elder Bednar’s April 2011 general conference address “The Spirit of Revelation.”

Patterns of Light, Part 1: The Light of Christ

Patterns of Light, Part 2: Discerning Light

Patterns of Light, Part 3: Spirit of Revelation

Learn more

3 Nephi 11:1–7 ; Doctrine and Covenants 6:14–16, 22–23 ; 8:2–3 ; 11:12–14 ; 85:6

Henry B. Eyring, “ The First Vision: A Pattern for Personal Revelation ,” Liahona , Feb. 2020, 13–17

“ Receiving Revelation ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Thomas S. Monson (2020), 77–87

Section 3

The Lord Directs His Church through Revelation

The spirit of revelation can guide each of us individually, but when the Lord wants to direct His Church, He speaks through the living prophet who serves as the President of the Church (see Doctrine and Covenants 107:91–92 ). Elder Dale G. Renlund taught: “Only the prophet receives revelation for the Church. It would be ‘contrary to the economy of God’ for others to receive such revelation. … Personal revelation rightly belongs to individuals. You can receive revelation, for example, about where to live, what career path to follow, or whom to marry. Church leaders may teach doctrine and share inspired counsel, but the responsibility for these decisions rests with you. That is your revelation to receive.”

Things to think about

Soon after the Church was organized, Joseph Smith’s important role as prophet was clarified for the members of the Church. Read Doctrine and Covenants 43:1–7 . How can the principle described in this passage protect you from being deceived by those who are not of God?

Activity for learning with others

With your group, read President M. Russell Ballard’s message “ The Vision of the Redemption of the Dead ,” looking for how the Lord prepared President Joseph F. Smith to receive such a significant revelation for the Church. How did President Smith’s life experiences prepare him for the vision he received? According to Doctrine and Covenants 138:1–11 , what did President Smith do that prepared him to be taught from heaven? How does this example help us understand the importance of preparing to recognize the spirit of revelation?

Learn more

Amos 3:7 ; Matthew 16:13–18 ; Doctrine and Covenants 1:37–38 ; Articles of Faith 1:9

Russell M. Nelson, “ Revelation for the Church, Revelation for Our Lives ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2018, 93–96

Quentin L. Cook, “ The Blessing of Continuing Revelation to Prophets and Personal Revelation to Guide Our Lives ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 96–100

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: George Albert Smith (2011), 111–22

Hear Him video collection, ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Other Resources about Revelation

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Videos

Hymns and children’s songs

Resources for Teaching Children

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ Revelation for the Church, Revelation for Our Lives ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2018, 95.

David A. Bednar, “ The Spirit of Revelation ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2011, 88–89.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Hear Him ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2020, 90.

Dale G. Renlund, “ A Framework for Personal Revelation ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 17.

M. Russell Ballard, “T he Vision of the Redemption of the Dead ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2018, 71–73.
