Sabbath Day
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/sabbath-day-study-guide?lang=eng

“Sabbath Day,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Sabbath Day

“Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy” ( Exodus 20:8 )

What does the Sabbath day usually look like for you? When you seek to honor the Sabbath in the Lord’s way, you will begin to view the Sabbath as a delight (see Isaiah 58:13–14 ). Worshipping God with others at Church, taking the sacrament, and keeping the day holy at home will bring spiritual power into your life and draw you closer to God. Setting aside one day each week to rest from work and leisure activities is one way we show our love for God and our desire to obey Him and keep our covenants. President M. Russell Ballard explained, “The power of the Sabbath day is to experience in church and at home the delight, the joy, and the warmth of feeling the Spirit of the Lord without any kind of distraction.”

What Is the Sabbath Day?

The Sabbath is a holy day set apart by God for us to rest from our labors and worship Him. Following the Creation of the world, God blessed the seventh day and made it sacred (see Genesis 2:2–3 ). He commanded the Israelites to “remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy” ( Exodus 20:8 ). After the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, His disciples began observing the Sabbath on Sunday, or the first day of the week (see Mark 16:2 ; Acts 20:7 ; 1 Corinthians 16:1–2 ). In the latter days, God renewed His commandment to observe the Sabbath day (see Doctrine and Covenants 59:9–13 ; 68:29 ).

Topic overview: Sabbath Day

Related gospel study guides: Worship God the Father , Sacrament , Fasting

Section 1

Your Sabbath-Day Observance Is a Sign of Your Devotion to God

President Russell M. Nelson said: “How do we hallow the Sabbath day? In my much younger years, I studied the work of others who had compiled lists of things to do and things not to do on the Sabbath. It wasn’t until later that I learned from the scriptures that my conduct and my attitude on the Sabbath constituted a sign between me and my Heavenly Father [see Exodus 31:13 ]. With that understanding, I no longer needed lists of dos and don’ts. When I had to make a decision whether or not an activity was appropriate for the Sabbath, I simply asked myself, ‘What sign do I want to give to God?’ That question made my choices about the Sabbath day crystal clear.” What kind of sign does your Sabbath day observance give to God?

Things to think about

Watch the video from Elder Jeffrey R. Holland “ Upon My Holy Day—Rest and Renewal ” (1:26). Elder Holland encourages us to do things on the Sabbath day differently than we do on other days. What impressions have you received about honoring the Sabbath day and keeping it holy?

Activity for learning with others

Read together Elder Quentin L. Cook’s account of attending a Jewish Shabbat, or Sabbath, in “ Shipshape and Bristol Fashion: Be Temple Worthy—in Good Times and Bad Times .” Invite members of the group to talk about the following questions: How did honoring the Sabbath day bless Elder Cook’s friends? How was the Sabbath “a delight” for them?

Learn more

Exodus 20:8 ; 31:13, 16–17 ; Mosiah 13:16–19 ; Moses 3:1–3

“ The Sabbath Is for You ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org

“ The Sabbath Is a Delight ” (video), Gospel Library

Henry B. Eyring, “Always Remember Him,” Ensign , Feb. 2018, 4–5

David A. Bednar, “ Exceeding Great and Precious Promises ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 90–93

M. Russell Ballard, “ The True, Pure, and Simple Gospel of Jesus Christ ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 28–30

Section 2

Jesus Christ Honored the Sabbath Day

By New Testament times, unauthorized regulations and traditions had been introduced to Jewish culture about what to do and not to do on the Sabbath day. Jesus was often criticized by the religious leaders of His time for how He and His disciples observed the Sabbath. Jesus taught that “the sabbath [is] made for man [and woman]” and that He is “Lord also of the sabbath” ( Mark 2:27, 28 ). To commemorate the day on which the Lord was resurrected, the disciples of Jesus Christ observed the Sabbath on the first day of the week (see Mark 16:2 ; Acts 20:7 ; 1 Corinthians 16:1–2 ).

As an important part of our Sabbath observance, we partake of the sacrament in remembrance of Christ’s atoning sacrifice, death, and Resurrection. When we partake of the sacrament, we make a covenant to take upon us the name of Jesus Christ, to keep His commandments, and to always remember Him. In turn, God promises us that we can have the Holy Spirit to always be with us. Having the Spirit includes being sanctified and forgiven of our sins. It also means having the constant companionship and guidance of the Holy Ghost. The Sabbath day is an opportunity to reflect on the blessings you have received as a follower of Jesus Christ.

Things to think about

Read the following accounts of the Savior honoring the Sabbath day: John 5:2–15 ; Luke 13:11–17 ; 14:1–6 . How were the people in these accounts blessed by the Savior’s service? In another passage, Jesus said, “It is lawful to do well on the sabbath days” ( Matthew 12:12 ). What do you think it means to “do well” on the Sabbath day?

How can you follow Jesus’s example of ministering to others on the Sabbath day?

Activity for learning with others

As a group, watch the video “ Gratitude on the Sabbath Day ” (3:39). Talk about ways we can show our appreciation and gratitude for Jesus Christ on the Sabbath day. What is the connection between keeping the Sabbath day holy and feeling gratitude for God’s blessings?

Learn more

James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (1916), 203–16

Dallin H. Oaks, “Sacrament Meeting and the Sacrament ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2008, 17–20

David A. Bednar, “ Exceeding Great and Precious Promises ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2017, 90–93

Section 3

Keeping the Sabbath Day Holy Helps Us Stay “Unspotted from the World”

The Lord taught, “And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day” ( Doctrine and Covenants 59:9 ). Our worship with others on the Sabbath day includes not only partaking of the sacrament but also praying, singing hymns, giving and receiving priesthood blessings, sharing testimonies, studying the scriptures, and giving service.

Things to think about

Participating in sacrament meeting is a meaningful way to center your life on Jesus Christ and increase in spiritual strength. When we are spiritually strong, we are better prepared to avoid and overcome temptation. How have keeping the Sabbath day holy and participating in sacrament meeting helped you in your efforts to be “unspotted from the world”?

Review the Lord’s message about the Sabbath day found in Doctrine and Covenants 59:9–15 . Regarding this passage, President M. Russell Ballard shared, “Please note some of the key words in this revelation: joy , rejoicing , thanksgiving , cheerful hearts , glad heart , and a cheerful countenance . It sounds to me like Sabbath-day observance should bring smiles to our faces.” When have you experienced these kinds of feelings on the Sabbath? What can you do to make your worship on the Sabbath day a joyful experience?

Activity for learning with others

Watch the video “ Is There a Place for Me? ” (3:59). Talk about the importance of helping others feel that they belong in their congregation at church. How can your efforts to help others feel belonging increase your own feeling of worship on the Sabbath day?

Learn more

Isaiah 58:13–14

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Sabbath Is a Delight ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2015, 129–32

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Sacrament Meeting and the Sacrament ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2008, 17–20

Other Resources about the Sabbath Day

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for teaching children

Notes

M. Russell Ballard, “ Precious Gifts from God ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2018, 10.

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Sabbath Is a Delight ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2015, 130.

Quentin L. Cook, “ Shipshape and Bristol Fashion: Be Temple Worthy—in Good Times and Bad Times ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov . 2015, 41.

See Bible Dictionary, “ Sabbath .”

M. Russell Ballard, “ The True, Pure, and Simple Gospel of Jesus Christ ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 29.
