Sacrament
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/sacrament?lang=eng

“Sacrament,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Sacrament

On the night before His Crucifixion, Jesus Christ met with His Apostles and instituted the sacrament. 1 After His Resurrection , He instituted the sacrament among the Nephites. 2 Today the sacrament is an ordinance in which Church members partake of bread and water in remembrance of Jesus Christ’s atoning sacrifice. This ordinance is an essential part of worship and spiritual development. Through this ordinance, Church members renew the covenants they made with God when they were baptized.

When He instituted the sacrament, Jesus Christ said: “This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me. … This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you.” 3 The sacrament provides an opportunity for Church members to ponder and remember with gratitude the life, ministry, and Atonement of the Son of God. The broken bread is a reminder of His body and His physical suffering—especially His suffering on the cross. It is also a reminder that through His mercy and grace , all people will be resurrected and given the opportunity for eternal life with God.

The water is a reminder that the Savior shed His blood in intense spiritual suffering and anguish, beginning in the Garden of Gethsemane and concluding on the cross. In the garden He said, “My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death.” 4 Submitting to the will of the Father, He suffered more than we can comprehend: “Blood [came] from every pore, so great [was] his anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of his people.” 5 He suffered for the sins, sorrows, and pains of all people, providing remission of sins for those who repent and live the gospel. 6 Through the shedding of His blood, Jesus Christ saved all people from what the scriptures call the “original guilt” of Adam’s transgression. 7

Partaking of the sacrament is a witness to God that the remembrance of His Son will extend beyond the short time of that sacred ordinance. Part of this ordinance is a promise to remember Him always and a witness of individual willingness to take upon oneself the name of Jesus Christ and to keep His commandments. In partaking of the sacrament and making these commitments, Church members renew the covenant they made at baptism. 8

In return, the Lord renews the promised remission of sin and enables Church members to “always have his Spirit to be with them.” 9 The Spirit’s constant companionship is one of the greatest gifts of mortality.

In preparation for the sacrament each week, Church members take time to examine their lives and repent of sins. They do not need to be perfect in order to partake of the sacrament, but they should have a spirit of humility and repentance in their hearts. Every week they strive to prepare for that sacred ordinance with a broken heart and a contrite spirit. 10

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Gospel Study Guide

Resources for children

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

See Luke 22:19–20 .

See 3 Nephi 18:1–11 .

Luke 22:19–20 .

Matthew 26:38 .

Mosiah 3:7 .

See 2 Nephi 9:21–23 .

Moses 6:54 .

See Mosiah 18:8–10 ; Doctrine and Covenants 20:37 .

Doctrine and Covenants 20:77 .

See 3 Nephi 9:20 .
