Sacrifice
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/sacrifice-study-guide?lang=eng

“Sacrifice,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Sacrifice

How we show what’s most important to us

Think of a time when you gave up something for the sake of somebody else. This may not have been an easy thing to do, but by making that sacrifice, you showed that you were willing to put that individual’s needs above your own.

Similarly, when we sacrifice something for God, we show that we love Him and are willing to put Him first in our lives. The highest expression of our sacrifice comes when we do God’s will rather than our own. Our sacrifices can reflect our love and gratitude for Jesus Christ, who—in the greatest of all acts of love—sacrificed His life so we can return to live with Heavenly Father.

What Is Sacrifice?

Sacrifice is the act of giving up one thing for the sake of something else. God’s people have made sacrifices to Him since ancient times. Today we sacrifice by giving our will to God and repenting of our sins with a broken heart and contrite spirit. We also sacrifice our time and talents to support God’s work of salvation and exaltation (see Matthew 6:33 ). Through sacrifice, we show our willingness to put God first in our lives (see Matthew 19:29 ).

Topic overview: Sacrifice

Related gospel study guides: Obedience , Tithing , Consecration , The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Section 1

God Gave the Law of Sacrifice as a Reminder of Christ’s Sacrifice

God’s children lived the law of sacrifice anciently by offering animal sacrifices as a reminder that the Lamb of God would redeem them from the Fall (see Colossians 1:13–18 ; Moses 5:6–7 ). After Jesus Christ willingly sacrificed His life on the cross, animal sacrifices were no longer necessary (see Luke 23:46 ; 3 Nephi 9:19 ; 4 Nephi 1:12 ). The Savior’s sacrifice was the greatest single act of love and brought about the redemption and salvation of humankind (see Isaiah 53:7 ; 2 Nephi 2:7 ).

To learn more about the Savior’s sacrifice, see the “ Atonement of Jesus Christ ” study guide.

Things to think about

Abraham’s faith was tested when God commanded him to sacrifice his son Isaac. Consider reading Genesis 22 ; Hebrews 11:17–19 ; and Jacob 4:5 , about the sacrifice God asked Abraham to make. As you do, reflect on the sacrifice God made in offering up His Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, and the sacrifice the Savior made in giving up His life. What does the Spirit teach you about the sacrifices of the Father and the Savior as you read these passages?

Activity for learning with others

When Jesus Christ carried out His Atonement, “the ordinance of the sacrament replaced the ordinance of sacrifice.” Consider singing sacrament hymns such as “ Upon the Cross of Calvary ” or “ How Great the Wisdom and the Love .” You might also read the scriptures associated with each hymn and discuss how you can prepare for the sacrament each week. How might thinking of the sacrament as an opportunity to sacrifice something to the Lord make your worship more meaningful?

Learn more

Leviticus 1:2–3, 10 ; Alma 34:8–14 ; Articles of Faith 1:3

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Behold the Lamb of God ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 44–46

Tracy Y. Browning, “ Seeing More of Jesus Christ in Our Lives ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 13–15

Section 2

God Asks Us for the Sacrifice of a Broken Heart and Contrite Spirit

Today we still live the law of sacrifice by offering God a broken heart and a contrite spirit (see 3 Nephi 9:19–20 ; Doctrine and Covenants 59:8 ). How do we offer this kind of sacrifice? By believing in Christ, humbling ourselves, truly repenting of our sins, and coming unto Him (see 3 Nephi 12:19 ; Moroni 6:1–3 ; Doctrine and Covenants 20:37 ). Making these types of sacrifices shows our love for God and that we are willing to do what He asks. As we give our whole souls to God and endure to the end, we can be saved and receive eternal life (see Omni 1:26 ).

Things to think about

It’s natural to wonder whether the Lord notices and accepts the sacrifices you make to follow Him. Ponder the Lord’s words to Joseph Smith in Doctrine and Covenants 132:49–50 . What blessings was Joseph promised because of his sacrifices? How have you been blessed because of the sacrifices you’ve made for God? You might write down a list of the blessings you’ve received and then reflect on them throughout the week.

One way we show our love for God is by making sacrifices to come unto Him. In his talk “ Our Heartfelt All ,” Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf explained that our sacrifices can be as simple as giving up our personal desires and comforts to more fully follow the Savior. Consider reading Elder Uchtdorf’s talk and pondering how you can give your heartfelt all to Jesus Christ. What can you sacrifice to follow the Savior better than you have before?

Activity for learning with others

In the video “ A Broken Heart, Contrite Spirit, and Godly Sorrow ” (3:58), Elder Neil L. Andersen explained that giving the Lord a broken heart and contrite spirit means “becoming more like a child.” You could watch this video and then discuss the qualities children have that we should seek for in sacrificing our will to God. You might also share experiences you’ve had with children that exemplify what we can learn from their attributes.

Learn more

Psalm 51:16–17 ; John 6:38 ; 2 Nephi 2:6–7 ; 4:32

Neill F. Marriott, “ Yielding Our Hearts to God ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2015, 30–32

Section 3

Through Daily Sacrifices, We Can Become Holy like Jesus Christ

Sacrificing for God can help us receive His power, through which we can become holy. By sacrificing for the Lord, we show our love for Him and others. We might think that sacrifice is difficult or hard to do, but mostly it means “living day-to-day as a true disciple of Christ.” As we sacrifice each day to keep our covenants and follow Jesus Christ, we are helping move the work of God forward.

Things to think about

One way we can sacrifice every day is by giving our time to the Lord. This can include things like fulfilling our callings or ministering to one another. President Dallin H. Oaks taught, “Our lives of service and sacrifice are the most appropriate expressions of our commitment to serve the Master and our fellowmen.” How do you regularly sacrifice your time to the Lord? Ponder how doing so has helped you draw closer to Christ and become more holy.

Sometimes the daily sacrifices we make as disciples of Christ can feel small and inconsequential to us. But these sacrifices are important to the Lord. Read Doctrine and Covenants 64:33 to learn how He views our efforts, no matter how small they might be. How does this verse give you courage to keep making small, daily sacrifices for the Lord?

Activities for learning with others

In the video “ A Sacrifice of Time ” (2:53), President Russell M. Nelson taught, “Our ancestors cannot be made perfect without us, and we cannot be made perfect without them.” By regularly doing temple and family history work, we become more holy, like Jesus Christ. Watch the video “ A Sacrifice of Time ” together, and then share how sacrificing your time to do temple and family history work more often has blessed you. What do you learn from others’ experiences that inspires you to continue or to start sacrificing your time in this way?

There are many ways you might be sacrificing something for the Lord and for others without even realizing it. When you keep your covenants, serve a friend or family member, pay your tithing, or share your talents, you are sacrificing for God and for His children. Make a list of specific ways you sacrifice daily to be a disciple of Christ. Then you could talk about how thinking of these things as sacrifices affects your discipleship and helps you draw closer to Him.

Learn more

1 Chronicles 16:29 ; Luke 18:22 ; Romans 12:1 ; Doctrine and Covenants 138:12–13

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Called to Serve ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2002, 36–38

Other Resources about Sacrifice

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ Our Heartfelt All ,” Liahona , May 2022, 124.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 94 .

M. Russell Ballard, “ The Law of Sacrifice ,” Ensign , Oct. 1998, 10.

Hymns , nos. 184 , 195 .

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ Our Heartfelt All ,” 124.

M. Russell Ballard, “ The Law of Sacrifice ,” 11.

Erich W. Kopischke, “ Being Accepted of the Lord ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2013, 105.

See Quentin L. Cook, “ Are You a Saint? ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2003, 95–96.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Sacrifice ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2012, 19.
