Sacrament
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/sacrament-study-guide?lang=eng

“Sacrament,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Sacrament

A sacred ordinance to draw us closer to Jesus Christ

What does the sacrament mean to you? Participating in this sacred ordinance each week can become a spiritual highlight in your life when you seek to understand its meaning. Shortly before His Crucifixion, Jesus gathered His disciples for a meal to commemorate the Passover. He knew His mortal life was about to end and that He would be leaving His disciples. He wanted them to remember His teachings. In that setting, Jesus gave bread and wine to His disciples, explaining that they were to partake in remembrance of His body and blood.

Your efforts to study the meaning and purpose of the sacrament can help you feel deep gratitude for all He has done for you.

What Is the Sacrament?

The sacrament is a priesthood ordinance in which Church members partake of bread and water each week in remembrance of Jesus Christ’s atoning sacrifice. The broken bread is a reminder of His body and His physical suffering. The water symbolizes Jesus’s blood, shed in severe anguish. When we worthily partake of the sacrament, we renew our covenants with the Lord, we retain a remission of our sins, and we recommit ourselves to follow Jesus Christ.

Topic overview: Sacrament

Related gospel study guides: Jesus Christ , Mortal Ministry of Jesus Christ , Atonement of Jesus Christ , Covenants and Ordinances , Sabbath Day

Section 1

The Sacrament Helps You Remember Jesus Christ

The day after He miraculously fed the 5,000, Jesus was preaching and taught that “whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day” ( John 6:54 ). At the time, these words likely confused His disciples. However, their meaning was later made clearer when the Lord introduced the sacrament to His disciples during the Last Supper.

As a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, you have the opportunity to participate weekly in the sacrament ordinance. Partaking of the bread and water helps you remember the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ, which He freely gave for all God’s children.

Things to think about

Read the scriptural accounts of Jesus Christ introducing the ordinance of the sacrament to His disciples in Jerusalem (see Matthew 26:26–28 ; Mark 14:22–24 ; Luke 22:19–20 ) and to the Nephites (see 3 Nephi 18:1–11 ). What do you learn from these passages about the sacrament? It may also be helpful to read the accounts found in Joseph Smith Translation, Matthew 26:22, 24–25 (in the Bible appendix) and Joseph Smith Translation, Mark 14:20–25 (in the Bible appendix).

Read Moses 5:4–8 . Anciently, God commanded His children to offer animal sacrifice in similitude, or likeness, of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ—the Lamb of God. How does the sacrament serve a purpose today like that of the sacrifices in Old Testament times? (See also Doctrine and Covenants 59:9–12 .)

The Lord told Joseph Smith that it doesn’t matter what we eat or drink for the sacrament as long as we remember the purpose for doing so (see Doctrine and Covenants 27:1–2 ). Consider why what we use as sacramental emblems is not as important as what those emblems help us remember.

Activity for learning with others

Consider watching together the video “ Sacrament ” (2:59) or “ Always Remember Him ” (5:27). You might discuss how your efforts to remember Jesus Christ and His atoning sacrifice can influence your feelings and actions. What can you do to focus more on Jesus Christ during sacrament meeting and when partaking of the sacrament?

Learn more

John 6:22–69

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Behold the Lamb of God ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 44–46

Section 2

Worthily Preparing for the Sacrament Brings Blessings

At times you may have found yourself just sitting through the sacrament, forgetting to really receive and experience this sacred ordinance as the Lord intended. But your efforts to prepare for and worthily partake of the sacrament can qualify you for rich blessings.

Elder David A. Bednar explained: “The ordinance of the sacrament is a holy and repeated invitation to repent sincerely and to be renewed spiritually. The act of partaking of the sacrament, in and of itself, does not remit sins. But as we prepare conscientiously and participate in this holy ordinance with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, then the promise is that we may always have the Spirit of the Lord to be with us. And by the sanctifying power of the Holy Ghost as our constant companion, we can always retain a remission of our sins.”

Things to think about

Read 1 Corinthians 11:23–29 . What does it mean for a person to “examine himself” when partaking of the sacrament? Why is it important to prepare to worthily receive the sacrament?

Listen to or read the words of a sacrament hymn, such as “ There Is a Green Hill Far Away ” or “ In Humility, Our Savior .” How can pondering the message found in a sacrament hymn enhance your gratitude for the sacrament ordinance?

Activity for learning with others

Read the sacrament prayers, found in Doctrine and Covenants 20:75–79 . Invite some in your group to look for what we promise when we partake of the sacrament while others look for what the Lord promises to do in return. You could also have the group read Doctrine and Covenants 20:37 and discuss the similarities between the promises made during the sacrament and the covenant of baptism.

Learn more

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ Behold the Lamb of God ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 44–46

Kevin W. Pearson, “ Are You Still Willing? ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 67–69

Peter F. Meurs, “ The Sacrament Can Help Us Become Holy ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2016, 85–87

Other Resources about the Sacrament

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

David A. Bednar, “ Always Retain a Remission of Your Sins ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2016, 61–62.

Hymns , nos. 194 , 172 .
