Salvation
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/salvation-study-guide?lang=eng

“Salvation,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Salvation

The gift of being resurrected from the dead and cleansed from sin through Jesus Christ

We all need Jesus Christ. One of His most important titles is “Savior,” meaning “one who saves.” Why do we need to be saved? The Book of Mormon prophet Abinadi explained that “all mankind … would have been endlessly lost were it not that God redeemed his people from their lost and fallen state” ( Mosiah 16:4 ). If left without God’s help, we would suffer forever from the consequences of sin. Additionally, death would hold a permanent grasp on everyone.

The good news of the gospel of Jesus Christ is that every person who has ever lived on the earth—regardless of his or her choices—will be resurrected and receive a perfected, immortal body (see Alma 40:23 ). And because of Jesus Christ, we can obtain forgiveness and cleansing from sin (see Mosiah 4:1–3 ; Helaman 3:35 ; Doctrine and Covenants 20:37 ).

What Is Salvation?

Salvation is the gift of being saved from physical and spiritual death. It comes through God’s grace and the power of Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world (see Doctrine and Covenants 43:34 ). It includes being resurrected from the dead and gaining immortality. Some scriptures use the words salvation or being saved to refer to eternal life. To receive eternal life is to know Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and to receive a place with Them for eternity. It is “the greatest of all the gifts of God” ( Doctrine and Covenants 6:13 ; 14:7 ).

Topic overview: Salvation

Related gospel study guides: Plan of Salvation , Atonement of Jesus Christ , Grace , Eternal Life , Participating in Temple and Family History Work

Section 1

Jesus Christ Is the Savior of the World

One of the greatest purposes of life on earth is to learn and believe that Heavenly Father sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to save us (see John 3:16–17 ; 2 Nephi 25:26 ). That message was proclaimed by prophets for thousands of years before His birth (see Mosiah 13:33–35 ; Helaman 8:13–20 ; 3 Nephi 20:23–24 ; Moses 4:1–2 ; 5:7–9 ). In the latter days, the Prophet Joseph Smith declared his witness and testimony of the Risen Christ (see Doctrine and Covenants 76:22–24 ; 110:1–4 ).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, “The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it.”

Things to think about

Read 2 Nephi 9:6–13 and Doctrine and Covenants 76:40–42 , which describe our need for a Savior. How does the Atonement of Jesus Christ help us overcome the effects of physical death and spiritual death?

The Gospel Topics overview “ Salvation” in the Gospel Library teaches that there are several important aspects of salvation. Review the descriptions of salvation outlined in that article, and reflect on which one is most meaningful to you. Why does that description resonate with you? Consider recording your feelings in your journal.

Activities for learning with others

Watch the video “ Because of Him ” (2:44). Afterward, invite group members to share what they felt as they watched the video. What did they learn about the mission of Jesus Christ? What effects will that knowledge have on their lives? You might invite group members to create their own list of “Because of Him” statements to share with the group as appropriate.

Salvation from death is a gift for all of God’s children that is made possible through Jesus Christ. Read 2 Nephi 2:4 and 2 Nephi 25:23–24 together. Why is it significant that salvation from sin cannot be purchased but is centered on faith in Jesus Christ? What are some ways we can turn to Him with greater faith?

Learn more

Moses 6:57–60 ; Articles of Faith 1:3

Russell M. Nelson, “ Salvation and Exaltation ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2008, 7–10

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Divine Love in the Father’s Plan ,” Liahona , May 2022, 101–4

Section 2

We Are to Stand as Witnesses of Jesus Christ

Many good people in the world are searching to understand God and how He can make their life better. All members of the Church today become witnesses of Jesus Christ when they are baptized and receive a testimony through the Holy Ghost (see 2 Nephi 31:13, 18 ; Mosiah 18:8–9 ; 3 Nephi 28:11 ). When we strive to become true followers of Jesus Christ, we experience His grace, which strengthens us. And it is ultimately through His grace that we are saved (see 2 Nephi 25:23 ). We show our gratitude for all Christ has done for us when we make and keep covenants with God. As recipients of His love, His forgiveness, and the promised blessings of salvation, we have a responsibility to share our witness with everyone we meet (see Luke 22:32 ; Mosiah 18:8–9 ; Doctrine and Covenants 84:61 ).

Things to think about

What has the Savior done for you? As you consider this question, read or listen to President Dallin H. Oaks’s talk “ What Has Our Savior Done for Us?” What do you learn from this talk about the power of Jesus Christ’s mission in your life? What personal experiences have you had with Jesus Christ that you would add to President Oaks’s list?

In 2 Nephi 25:23 , we learn that “it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do.” In this context, being “saved” means being cleansed of sin so we can live in God’s presence again. You might review the subsection “ All We Can Do ” in President Dieter F. Uchtdorf’s message “The Gift of Grace.” What does “after all we can do” mean in your life? What is the relationship between “all we can do” and the mission of Jesus Christ?

Activity for learning with others

Heavenly Father wants us to share our testimony of Jesus Christ and the promise of salvation. Read Doctrine and Covenants 18:10–17 , which describes some of the reasons for reaching out to others with the message of the gospel of Jesus Christ. What are some of the reasons given in this passage for why God invites us to join Him in the work of helping others obtain the blessings of salvation? When have you or when has someone you know found the joy of helping another person receive the gospel and make covenants with God?

Learn more

James E. Faust, “ The Atonement: Our Greatest Hope ,” Ensign , Nov. 2001, 18–20

“ The Savior Understands Me ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Section 3

The Work of Salvation Continues in the Spirit World

The scriptures teach that redemption from death, or resurrection, is a universal gift to all who have ever lived, regardless of their choices (see Acts 24:15 ). However, salvation from the effects of sin requires faith in Jesus Christ and repentance. We also know from the scriptures that we must be baptized to be saved in the kingdom of God (see John 3:5 ).

However, many of God’s children have died without being baptized or even hearing about Jesus Christ. How can these people receive salvation? The scriptures teach that Jesus Christ visited the world of spirits after His death (see 1 Peter 3:18–20 ). He organized efforts to preach the gospel there, providing a way for everyone to have a chance to learn the gospel. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints perform vicarious baptisms and other ordinances for the dead in temples, extending the opportunity of salvation through Christ to the spirits of the dead (see Doctrine and Covenants 128:5, 18 ).

Things to think about

Significant revelations concerning the redemption of the dead are recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. For example, read Doctrine and Covenants 138:11–32 . What does this passage teach you about God’s work to make salvation available in the spirit world?

The scriptures teach us that little children are holy and are sanctified through the Atonement of Jesus Christ and do not need to be baptized to obtain salvation. Read Moroni 8:8–25 ; Doctrine and Covenants 74:7 ; 137:10 . What do you learn about the nature of God from these passages? How can this doctrine help individuals and families who are struggling with the loss of a child?

Activity for learning with others

In Doctrine and Covenants 128 , the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote, “We without [our ancestors] cannot be made perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect” (verse 18). What do you think he meant by this? Invite group members to share their ideas. You might also invite group members to learn about an ancestor who has passed away or, if they are able to do so, to make an appointment in the house of the Lord to perform ordinances for the dead.

Learn more

D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Redemption of the Dead and the Testimony of Jesus,” Ensign , Nov. 2000, 9–11

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 401–10

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith (2011), 128–35

Other Resources about Salvation

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Resources for Teaching Children

Notes

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Savior ,” Gospel Library.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 49 .
