Salvation
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/salvation?lang=eng

Overview

Salvation

Overview

In the doctrine of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the terms “saved” and “salvation” have various meanings. As used in Romans 10:9–10 , the words “saved” and “salvation” signify a covenant relationship with Jesus Christ. Through this covenant relationship, followers of Christ are assured salvation from the eternal consequences of sin if they are obedient. “Salvation” and “saved” are also used in the scriptures in other contexts with several different meanings.

If someone were to ask if another person had been saved, the answer would depend on the sense in which the word is used. The answer might be “Yes” or perhaps it might be “Yes, but with conditions.” The following explanations outline six different meanings of the word salvation.

Salvation from Physical Death. All people eventually die. But through the Atonement and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, all people will be resurrected—saved from physical death. Paul testified, “As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive” ( 1 Corinthians 15:22 ). In this sense, everyone is saved, regardless of choices made during this life. This is a free gift from the Savior to all human beings.

Salvation from Sin. To be cleansed from sin through the Savior’s Atonement, an individual must exercise faith in Jesus Christ, repent, be baptized, and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost (see Acts 2:37–38 ). Those who have been baptized and have received the Holy Ghost through the proper priesthood authority have been conditionally saved from sin. In this sense, salvation is conditional, depending on an individual’s continuing in faithfulness, or enduring to the end in keeping the commandments of God (see 2 Peter 2:20–22 ).

Individuals cannot be saved in their sins; they cannot receive unconditional salvation simply by declaring a belief in Christ with the understanding that they will inevitably commit sins throughout the rest of their lives (see Alma 11:36–37 ). However, through the grace of God, all can be saved from their sins (see 2 Nephi 25:23 ; Helaman 5:10–11 ) as they repent and follow Jesus Christ.

Being Born Again. The principle of spiritual rebirth appears frequently in the scriptures. The New Testament contains Jesus’s teaching that everyone must be “born again” and that those who are not “born of water and of the Spirit … cannot enter into the kingdom of God” ( John 3:5 ). This teaching is affirmed in the Book of Mormon: “All mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters; and thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God” ( Mosiah 27:25–26 ).

This rebirth occurs as individuals are baptized and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. It comes as a result of a willingness “to enter into a covenant with our God to do his will, and to be obedient to his commandments in all things that he shall command us, all the remainder of our days” ( Mosiah 5:5 ). Through this process, their “hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, [they] are born of him” ( Mosiah 5:7 ). All who have truly repented, been baptized, have received the gift of the Holy Ghost, have made the covenant to take upon themselves the name of Jesus Christ, and have felt His influence in their lives, can say that they have been born again. That rebirth can be renewed each Sabbath when they partake of the sacrament.

Salvation from Ignorance. Many people live in a state of darkness, not knowing the light of the restored gospel. They are “only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it” ( Doctrine and Covenants 123:12 ). Those who have a knowledge of God the Father, Jesus Christ, the purpose of life, the plan of salvation, and their eternal potential are saved from this condition. They follow the Savior, who declared, “I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life” ( John 8:12 ).

Salvation from the Second Death. The scriptures sometimes speak of salvation from the second death. The second death is the final spiritual death—being cut off from righteousness and denied a place in any kingdom of glory (see Alma 12:32 ; Doctrine and Covenants 88:24 ). This second death will not come until the Final Judgment, and it will come to only a few (see Doctrine and Covenants 76:31–37 ). Almost every person who has ever lived on the earth is assured salvation from the second death (see Doctrine and Covenants 76:40–45 ).

Eternal Life, or Exaltation. In the scriptures, the words saved and salvation often refer to eternal life, or exaltation (see Abraham 2:11 ). Eternal life is to know Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and dwell with Them forever—to inherit a place in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom (see John 17:3 ; Doctrine and Covenants 131:1–4 ; 132:21–24 ). This exaltation requires that men receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, and that all Church members make and keep sacred covenants in the temple, including the covenant of eternal marriage. If the word salvation is used in this sense, no one is saved in mortality. That glorious gift comes only after the Final Judgment.

Record Your Impressions

Related Topics

Atonement of Jesus Christ

Baptism

Eternal Life

Grace

Kingdoms of Glory

Scriptures

Scripture References

Mosiah 5:8–15

Mosiah 27:25–26

Helaman 5:10–11

3 Nephi 9:21–22

Doctrine and Covenants 132:21–24

Articles of Faith 1:3

Scripture Study Resources

Topical Guide, “ Salvation ,” “ Salvation for the Dead ,” “ Salvation of Little Children ,” “ Salvation, Plan of ”

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Plan of Redemption ,” “ Salvation ”

Index to the Triple Combination, “ Salvation ”

Messages from Church Leaders

Salvation and Exaltation

President Russell M. Nelson

Have You Been Saved?

President Dallin H. Oaks

How Men Are Saved

President Marion G. Romney

Principles of Temporal Salvation

President Marion G. Romney

The Salvation of Little Children

Elder Bruce R. McConkie

Salvation Comes through the Church

Elder Mark E. Petersen

Videos

“Because of Him”

“What Happens after We Die?”

“Jesus Teaches of Being Born Again”

“I Am the Bread of Life”

“Plan of Salvation—We’re Still a Family”

“Our Eternal Life”

“The Plan of Salvation”

Learning Resources

General Resources

“ Plan of Salvation ,” ComeUntoChrist.org

“ Jesus Christ: Lord and Savior ,” ComeUntoChrist.org

“ Jesus Christ ,” ComeUntoChrist.org

Church Magazines

Mark A. Mathews, “ God’s Plan for Families ,” Ensign, July 2015

“ The Plan of Salvation ,” New Era, July 2015

“ Using the Plan of Salvation to Answer Questions ,” Ensign, April 2014

“ The Plan of Salvation ,” Friend, August 2010

Margaret Lifferth, “ Sharing Time: The Plan of Happiness ,” Friend, January 2005

Robert England Lee, “ Teaching Our Children the Plan of Salvation ,” Ensign, September 2001

Jay M. Todd, “ Salvation for the Dead ,” Ensign, February 1995

Judy Edwards, “ Sharing Time: The Plan of Salvation Offers Me Peace ,” Ensign or Liahona, March 1994

“ What is salvation? ” New Era, April 1971

Study Manuals

“The Atonement”

Gospel Principles, chapter 12

“The Plan of Salvation”

Preach My Gospel: A Guide to Missionary Service, lesson 2

In the News

“ Plan of Salvation ,” Newsroom

“ Grace ,” Newsroom

“ Jesus Christ ,” Newsroom

“ Heaven ,” Newsroom

“ What Mormons Believe About Jesus Christ ,” Newsroom

“ Church ‘Because of Him’ Easter Message Reaches Millions ,” Newsroom

Teachings of Presidents of the Church

“The Great Plan of Salvation”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith, chapter 17

“The Plan of Salvation”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young, chapter 7

“Salvation through Jesus Christ”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young, chapter 40

“The Great Plan of Life and Salvation”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith, chapter 17

“Our Father in Heaven”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Fielding Smith, chapter 1

“Our Savior, Jesus Christ”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Fielding Smith, chapter 2

“The Plan of Salvation”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Fielding Smith, chapter 3

“Sealing Power and Temple Blessings”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Fielding Smith, chapter 17

“Freedom of Choice, an Eternal Principle”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson, chapter 3

“Priceless Blessings of the House of the Lord”

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson, chapter 13

Teaching Resources

Teaching Outlines

“The Plan of Salvation”

New Testament Seminary Teacher Manual, lesson 2

“The Plan of Salvation”

Book of Mormon Seminary Teacher Manual, lesson 3

“The Plan of Salvation”

Old Testament Seminary Teacher Manual, lesson 2

“The Plan of Salvation”

Doctrine and Covenants and Church History Seminary Teacher Manual, lesson 1

Media

Audio

“ Children of Christ ,” The Latter-day Saints Channel Q&A, episode 38

“ Salvation and Exaltation ,” The Latter-day Saints Channel Q&A, episode 44

Music

“Now Let Us Rejoice,” Hymns, no. 3

“I Believe in Christ,” Hymns, no. 134

“Lord, Accept into Thy Kingdom,” Hymns, no. 236

“O Thou Rock of Our Salvation,” Hymns, no. 258

“Come, All Whose Souls Are Lighted,” Hymns, no. 268

“I Lived in Heaven,” Children’s Songbook, 4

“Families Can Be Together Forever,” Children’s Songbook, 188

Images

Salvation in Christ, Media Library

As We Look to Jesus, New Era, Feb. 2015

Every One of You, New Era, Feb. 2015

Eternal Perspective, Media Library

10 Steps to a Blueprint of Success, Media Library

Everlasting Beginnings, Media Library

The Power of God unto Salvation, Media Library
