Scriptures
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/scriptures-study-guide?lang=eng

“Scriptures,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Scriptures

A record of God’s dealings with His children

Have you ever experienced finding a passage in the scriptures that seems to speak directly to you? The scriptures hold spiritual power (see Luke 24:32 ; 2 Nephi 32:3 ). They testify that Jesus Christ is our Savior and Redeemer and lead us to Him as the source of our salvation. Our loving Heavenly Father has given us scripture to teach us about His plan for our happiness, to help us gain a testimony of His Son Jesus Christ, to guide us, to give us hope, and so much more. Throughout history, ancient and modern prophets have recorded divine messages they receive and accounts of God’s dealings with His children. We are blessed to have access to the word of God in our day.

What Are the Scriptures?

The scriptures are sacred books that contain God’s word, teachings of prophets, and inspired accounts of God’s dealings with His children (see 2 Peter 1:20–21 ). The official scriptures of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, referred to as the “standard works,” include the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price.

Topic overview: Scriptures

Related gospel study guides: Bible , Book of Mormon , Prophets , Learning and Teaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ

Section 1

The Scriptures Can Bring You Closer to Your Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ

Elder D. Todd Christofferson declared, “The central purpose of all scripture is to fill our souls with faith in God the Father and in His Son, Jesus Christ.” The message and spiritual power of the scriptures lead us to salvation. President Ezra Taft Benson taught, “The word of God, as found in the scriptures, … has the power to fortify the Saints and arm them with the Spirit so they can resist evil, hold fast to the good, and find joy in this life.” Your decision to read and study the scriptures is an important step toward becoming like Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ.

Things to think about

Elder Robert D. Hales taught: “When we want to speak to God, we pray. And when we want Him to speak to us, we search the scriptures.” When have you felt that the scriptures provided you with answers? What would you share with others to help them recognize that the scriptures can help them receive answers from God?

The prophet Nephi recorded what he hoped readers of his inspired writings would experience. Read 1 Nephi 6:1–6 . How can understanding Nephi’s purpose for writing his account influence the way you study the Book of Mormon?

Activity for learning with others

Together, watch the video “ President Nelson—The Scriptures Teach Us about Jesus Christ (for Youth) ” (0:59), looking for the truths President Russell M. Nelson promised we can learn from the scriptures. What did he say about the importance of immersing ourselves daily in the scriptures?

Learn more

2 Nephi 4:15–16 ; Doctrine and Covenants 18:34–36 ; 20:8–15

Russell M. Nelson, “ Living by Scriptural Guidance ,” Ensign , Nov. 2000, 16–18

“ The Power of the Word ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 115–24

“ Scriptures Are God’s Recipes for Happy Living, Said President Nelson ” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Section 2

The Scriptures Are a Sacred Collection of God’s Words to His Children

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints “believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and … that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God” ( Articles of Faith 1:9 ). Many of God’s revelations to His children are recorded in the scriptures, which include the Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. These books are called the “standard works” and are considered the official, or canonized, scriptures of the Church.

The Bible is a record of God’s dealings with His people, from Adam’s day to the time when the Apostles of Jesus Christ lived. It’s divided into two parts: the Old Testament and the New Testament. The Old Testament teaches that the promised Messiah would come as our Savior and Redeemer. The New Testament records the life of Jesus Christ and His atoning sacrifice and Resurrection. It also includes His Apostles’ teachings to members of the Church that Jesus Christ established during that time.

The Book of Mormon is a sacred record of the people living in the Western Hemisphere between about 2000 BC and AD 400. It bears the subtitle “Another Testament of Jesus Christ.” It was written for the purpose of “convincing … the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God” ( title page of the Book of Mormon ).

The Doctrine and Covenants contains many modern revelations received as part of the Restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Most of these revelations were received by the Prophet Joseph Smith during the nineteenth century.

The Pearl of Great Price contains writings from the book of Moses and the book of Abraham. It also includes part of Joseph Smith’s translation of the Bible, selections from his history of the Church, and the Articles of Faith.

In addition to the standard works, Latter-day Saints consider the inspired words and teachings of modern prophets to be scripture. “Whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture” ( Doctrine and Covenants 68:4 ).

Things to think about

Read Alma 37:8–10 , looking for ways the scriptures made a difference among the people in Alma’s day. When have you seen similar blessings in your life or in the lives of those around you? Which of the blessings listed in this passage would you hope for right now in your life?

The Book of Mormon prophets Lehi and Nephi saw a vision in which the word of God was represented as a rod of iron (see 1 Nephi 8 ; 11 ). You might review these chapters and consider why a rod of iron is an appropriate symbol for the word of God. When have the scriptures been an iron rod for you?

Activity for learning with others

Consider watching part or all of the video “ Scriptures Legacy ” (22:29). Invite the group to share which stories impressed them most about the people who helped make the scriptures available to us today. How can these accounts influence our feelings about scripture study?

Learn more

1 Nephi 19:23 ; 3 Nephi 23:1–6, 14 ; Articles of Faith 1:8–9

Guide to the Scriptures, “ Bible ,” “ Book of Mormon ,” “ Doctrine and Covenants ,” “ Pearl of Great Price ,” Gospel Library

Russell M. Nelson, “ Scriptural Witnesses ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2007, 43–45

D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Blessing of Scripture ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2010, 32–35

“ The Scriptures, ‘Great Reservoirs of Spiritual Water’ ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Harold B. Lee (2011), 59–68

Section 3

Studying the Scriptures Can Bring Light and Truth into Your Life

All the latter-day prophets have reminded us of the value of studying the scriptures. The scriptures become a rich blessing to all who make time to read and learn from them. As we study the words of prophets, we can learn truth and receive guidance from the Holy Ghost. The Lord warned the early Saints: “Your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received. … Repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given [you]” ( Doctrine and Covenants 84:54, 57 ). The scriptures have the power to dispel darkness through the spiritual light that comes through the Holy Ghost when we read and study them.

Things to think about

In the Book of Mormon, Lehi’s family was led in their journey through the wilderness by a ball or compass called the Liahona. When they exercised faith and diligence, the Liahona showed the course they should travel. Read Alma 37:38–47 , looking for ways the scriptures might serve you today as the Liahona did for Lehi’s family. What can we do to receive all the spiritual benefits of the scriptures, or the words of Christ?

Memorizing a passage of scripture can provide spiritual help and power in times of need. Review Elder Richard G. Scott’s talk “ The Power of Scripture. ” What do you learn from this talk that might lead you to adjust the way you approach your study of the scriptures?

Activity for learning with others

There are many promised blessings associated with scripture study. Look for the different blessings promised in the following passages, and discuss how you have seen those blessings fulfilled:

Joshua 1:8

Psalm 119:105

Romans 15:4

2 Timothy 3:15–17

1 Nephi 15:24

Helaman 15:7–8

Doctrine and Covenants 1:37–38

Doctrine and Covenants 33:16–17

Learn more

2 Nephi 31:20 ; Joseph Smith—History 1:11–13, 73–74

“ Power of the Word ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 115–124

“ Liken All Scriptures ” (video), Gospel Library

“ The Scriptures—The Most Profitable of All Study ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Howard W. Hunter (2015), 143–53

“ Discovering the Scriptures for Ourselves ,” Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Spencer W. Kimball (2011), 59–68

Other Resources about Scriptures

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for Teaching Children

Notes

D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Blessing of Scripture ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2010, 34.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 118 .

Robert D. Hales, “ Holy Scriptures: The Power of God unto Our Salvation ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2006, 26–27.

Richard G. Scott, “ The Power of Scripture ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2011, 6–8.
