Second Coming of Jesus Christ
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/second-coming-of-jesus-christ-study-guide?lang=eng

“Second Coming of Jesus Christ,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Second Coming of Jesus Christ

Jesus Christ will come again in great power and glory

Can you think of a time when you looked forward with much anticipation to the visit of a relative or a friend who lived far away? What did you do to prepare for that visit? Think about the time and effort you put into getting ready and the happiness you felt as you eagerly awaited the person’s arrival.

Many people look forward to the Second Coming of our Savior with great anticipation as well. His return will signal the end of war and strife on the earth and will mark the beginning of 1,000 years of peace and righteousness. Because we look forward to the Savior’s return, we can have hope and joy. We know that when He comes, Jesus Christ will right all wrongs and “wipe away all tears” ( Revelation 21:4 ).

As you study the events of the Second Coming, you might consider what you are doing and what more you can do to prepare for that wondrous event.

What Is the Second Coming?

The Second Coming is when Jesus Christ will return to the earth to rule and reign. Jesus and many prophets, both ancient and modern, taught that Jesus would come to the earth a second time (see Isaiah 66:14–15 ; Matthew 24:42–44, 50 ; Acts 1:11 ). When He returns as a resurrected being with great power and glory, it will forever change the world. At that time, the Savior will claim the earth as His kingdom and establish peace throughout the world.

Topic overview: Second Coming

Related gospel study guides: Jesus Christ , Resurrection , Repentance

Section 1

Jesus Christ Will Return to the Earth in Glory and Power

When Jesus came to earth the first time, most people didn’t know it had happened. He was born to a humble woman, far from home, and laid in a manger. When He comes the second time, Jesus told His disciples, “the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels” ( Matthew 16:27 ).

Prophets have also often spoken of the Second Coming of Jesus Christ. President Russell M. Nelson called it “the climax of this last dispensation.” And Elder D. Todd Christofferson said, “The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is uniquely empowered and commissioned to accomplish the necessary preparations for the Lord’s Second Coming; indeed, it was restored for that purpose.”

When Christ returns, all people will know it (see Doctrine and Covenants 101:23 ). The prophet Isaiah declared, “And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together” ( Isaiah 40:5 ). This monumental event will mark the beginning of a glorious 1,000-year period, known as the Millennium , when Jesus will reign personally on the earth, Satan will have no power (see Revelation 20:1–3 ; Doctrine and Covenants 45:55 ), and all people will live in peace and joy.

Things to think about

When Jesus Christ returns, all wickedness on the earth will end. Why will that time be dreadful for some people? (You could read and ponder Doctrine and Covenants 29:17 .) Why will the Savior’s Second Coming not be a fearful time for the righteous? (You could read and ponder 1 Nephi 22:17, 22 .)

Activities for learning with others

When Jesus comes again as Lord of lords, many important events will occur. You might each study one or more of the following passages and share what you learn about these coming events: Matthew 25:31–46 ; Doctrine and Covenants 29:9–11 ; 63:53–54 ; 76:50–54, 63 ; 88:96–98 ; 101:24–25 ; 133:19, 25 ; and Articles of Faith 1:10 . What do these events teach us about Jesus Christ?

Look at a picture of the baby Jesus, and compare it to a picture of His Second Coming. You might read or sing “ Jesus, Once of Humble Birth ” to help you talk about some of the differences between the two pictures. What do these pictures and this song help us understand about Jesus Christ?

Sing or read together the words to a song or hymn about the Second Coming, such as “ Redeemer of Israel ” or “ When He Comes Again ,” and talk about what it teaches about the Savior and His return to the earth.

Learn more

Malachi 3:1 ; Luke 21:25–28 ; Acts 1:9–11 ; Doctrine and Covenants 36:8

Neil L. Andersen, “ Thy Kingdom Come ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2015, 119–22

Section 2

We Should Prepare for the Savior’s Return

Jesus said, “Of that day and hour [of my return] knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only” ( Matthew 24:36 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 49:7 ). The time of Christ’s Second Coming will be a surprise for many (see 2 Peter 3:10 ; Doctrine and Covenants 106:4 ). But true disciples of Jesus Christ will not be surprised. The Lord said His followers would “be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief” ( Doctrine and Covenants 106:5 ).

The Savior told the early Saints of this dispensation, “Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh” ( Doctrine and Covenants 1:12 ). Prophets have also repeatedly spoken of the need to prepare for the Savior’s return. President Dallin H. Oaks counseled, “While we are powerless to alter the fact of the Second Coming and unable to know its exact time, we can accelerate our own preparation and try to influence the preparation of those around us.” The Lord has provided signs that will indicate He is coming soon, and we can seek out and study these signs (see, for example, Joseph Smith—Matthew 1 ).

Things to think about

One way we can prepare for the Savior’s return is to strive to be in places where His Spirit can be with us. The Lord taught the early Saints, “Wherefore, stand ye in holy places, and be not moved, until the day of the Lord come; for behold, it cometh quickly” ( Doctrine and Covenants 87:8 ). Why do you think being in holy places is a good way to prepare for the Savior’s return? President Oaks explained: “What are those ‘holy places’? Surely they include the temple and its covenants faithfully kept. Surely they include a home where children are treasured and parents are respected. Surely the holy places include our posts of duty assigned by priesthood authority, including missions and callings faithfully fulfilled in branches, wards, and stakes.” Think about how you are blessed as you spend your time doing Christ-centered activities in holy places. How are these activities preparing you for the Lord’s return?

Read Joseph Smith—Matthew 1 , looking for prophecies of events that will precede the Second Coming. How can knowing about these events help you prepare for them? How can you help family or friends be ready for the Second Coming and the challenging events that will lead up to it? How can you prepare your heart for life after the Second Coming, where there will be no contention, no poverty, and no evil? What qualities do you feel it would be important for you to have when the Savior returns? How will you develop those qualities? Write down and act on the impressions you receive.

Think about the name of the Lord’s restored Church. What does it mean to you to be a “Latter-day Saint”? How can you use the name of the Church more in your everyday conversations to let others know of your belief in the Savior and your faith and hope in His return?

Activities for learning with others

The Savior shared the parable of the ten virgins to teach us the importance of being ready at all times for His return (see Matthew 25:1–13 ; Doctrine and Covenants 45:56–57 ). Speaking of the oil described in this parable, Elder David A. Bednar taught: “This precious oil is acquired one drop at a time—‘line upon line [and] precept upon precept’ ( 2 Nephi 28:30 ), patiently and persistently. No shortcut is available; no last-minute flurry of preparation is possible.” Consider filling a container with one drop of oil at a time as you talk about things we might do as individuals, in our families, and in our wards to prepare for the Second Coming of Jesus Christ.

As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we have a unique and divinely given role to help gather “a people prepared to receive Him at His coming.” Review President Nelson’s article “ The Future of the Church: Preparing the World for the Savior’s Second Coming .” Then discuss what it means to prepare the world to receive our Savior. Why do you think the Savior has assigned the Latter-day Saints to prepare the world for His coming? How do we do that?

Some people might feel anxiety or fear when they think about the events that will occur before the Savior’s Second Coming. You could read together the following statement: “The best way we can prepare for the Savior’s coming is to accept the teachings of the gospel and make them part of our lives. We should live each day the best we can, just as Jesus taught when He was on the earth. We can look to the prophet for guidance and follow His counsel. We can live worthy to have the Holy Ghost guide us. Then we will look forward to the Savior’s coming with happiness and not with fear.” Then talk about how each of these suggestions can help us to better live the gospel so we can feel peace and calm when we think about the events surrounding the Savior’s return.

Learn more

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Book of Mormon, the Gathering of Israel, and the Second Coming ,” Ensign , July 2014, 26–31

D. Todd Christofferson, “ Preparing for the Lord’s Return ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 81–84

Amy A. Wright, “ Abide the Day in Christ ,” Liahona , Nov. 2023, 9–12

Other Resources about the Second Coming of Jesus Christ

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Resources for teaching children

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Future of the Church: Preparing the World for the Savior’s Second Coming ,” Ensign , Apr. 2020, 14.

D. Todd Christofferson, “ Preparing for the Lord’s Return ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 82.

“ Jesus, Once of Humble Birth ,” Hymns , no. 196.

“ Redeemer of Israel ,” Hymns , no. 6.

“ When He Comes Again ,” Children’s Songbook , 82–83.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Preparation for the Second Coming ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2004, 8.

Dallin H. Oaks, “ Preparation for the Second Coming ,” 10.

David A. Bednar, “ Converted unto the Lord ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2012, 109.

D. Todd Christofferson, “ Preparing for the Lord’s Return ,” 82.

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Future of the Church ,” 12–17.

Gospel Principles (2011), 261 .
