Self-Reliance
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/self-reliance?lang=eng

“Self-Reliance,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Self-Reliance

The purpose of becoming spiritually and temporally self-reliant is to better serve the Lord and care for others. The Savior invites us all to act, to stand independent, and to become as He is. He will help us. He has promised: “It is my purpose to provide for my saints, for all things are mine. But it must needs be done in mine own way.” His way includes learning and living the principles of self-reliance—“the ability, commitment, and effort to provide the necessities of life for self and family.”

Accepting and living the following principles of self-reliance will help us receive the spiritual and temporal blessings promised by the Lord.

Exercise Faith in Jesus Christ. The Lord has all power. He can and will work great tender mercies among those who trust Him in all things. As we exercise faith in Jesus Christ , He can do miracles .

Be Obedient. Obedience to God’s laws, principles, and promptings leads to spiritual and temporal blessings.

Act. Individual accountability and action activate blessings.

Serve and Be United. Service and unity build Zion —this is the way of the Lord. Elder Robert D. Hales of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said, “Only when we are self-reliant can we truly emulate the Savior in serving and blessing others.”

Prophetic Promises

The First Presidency has said: “We invite you to diligently study and apply these principles and teach them to your family members. As you do so, your life will be blessed. You will learn how to act on your path toward greater self-reliance. You will be blessed with greater hope, peace, and progress.

“Please be assured that you are a child of our Father in Heaven. He loves you and will never forsake you. He knows you and is ready to extend to you the spiritual and temporal blessings of self-reliance.”

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Life Help

Notes

Doctrine and Covenants 104:15–16 .

Providing in the Lord’s Way: Summary of a Leader’s Guide to Welfare (2009).

“ A Gospel Vision of Welfare: Faith in Action ,” in Basic Principles of Welfare and Self-Reliance (booklet, 2009), 2.

First Presidency letter , in My Foundation: Principles, Skills, Habits (2014), 2.
