Service
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/service?lang=eng

“Service,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Service

During His ministry on the earth, Jesus Christ spent His time serving and helping others. True disciples of Christ do likewise. The Savior said, “By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.” 1

Those who are baptized covenant to take the name of Jesus Christ upon themselves. The prophet Alma explained this covenant to a group of new converts who wanted to be baptized. He observed that their desire to “come into the fold of God” included a willingness to give meaningful service—to “bear one another’s burdens, that they may be light,” to “mourn with those that mourn,” and to “comfort those that stand in need of comfort.” 2

The Savior is the best example of service. Even though He came to earth as the Son of God, He humbly served all those around Him. He declared, “I am among you as he that serveth.” 3

The Savior used a parable to teach the importance of service. In the parable, He told of His return to the earth in His glory and of separating the righteous from the wicked. To the righteous in this parable He says: “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.” 4

The righteous, who are puzzled by this declaration, ask: “Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?” 5

Then the Lord answers, “Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.” 6

Opportunities for service to others are limitless. Kind words and deeds can lift burdens and gladden hearts. Sharing the gospel is a great service with eternal consequences. One true key to happiness is to labor for the happiness of others.

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Gospel Study Guide

Resources for children

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

John 13:35 .

Mosiah 18:8–9 .

Luke 22:27 .

Matthew 25:34–36 .

Matthew 25:37–39 .

Matthew 25:40 .
