Single-Parent Families
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/single-parent-families?lang=eng

“Single-Parent Families,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Single-Parent Families

The First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles have taught that “marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator’s plan for the eternal destiny of His children.” 1 While this family unit is the ideal, many Church members find themselves in a variety of other circumstances, including in single-parent families. The gospel of Jesus Christ was given by God to bless all His children, without exception, regardless of the family situations in which they find themselves.

Because of a variety of circumstances, including death, divorce, and separation, many Church members find themselves in single-parent families. Regardless of their family situation, all Church members are entitled to receive all the blessings of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The structure and fellowship of the Church enable many people who are willing and ready to help parents and children and to strengthen them in the gospel.

Addressing single parents, President Hinckley said:

“This is a lonely duty. But you need not be entirely alone. There are many, ever so many in this Church who would reach out to you with sensitivity and understanding. They do not wish to intrude where they are not wanted. But their interest is genuine and sincere, and they bless their own lives as they bless your lives and those of your children. Welcome their help. They need to give it for their own sakes as well as for your sake.

“We have thousands of good bishops in this Church. We have thousands of good quorum officers. We have thousands of wonderful Relief Society women. We have home teachers and visiting teachers [ministering brothers and sisters]. They are your friends, put in place by the Lord to give of their strength to help you. And never forget that the Lord Himself is a source of strength greater than any other.” 2

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Notes

“ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library.

Gordon B. Hinckley, “ To Single Adults ,” Ensign , June 1989, 74.
