Spirit World
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/spirit-world?lang=eng

“Spirit World,” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Spirit World

The postmortal spirit world is a place where the spirits of those who have died dwell before the Resurrection . The spirit world consists of paradise, where the righteous dwell, and spirit prison, where those who did not know the gospel or who were wicked in mortality dwell. The postmortal spirit world is on the earth, around us.

Paradise

Paradise is where the righteous spirits of those who have departed from this life await the Resurrection. It is a condition of happiness and peace.

The prophet Alma taught that these righteous spirits rest from earthly care and sorrow. But they are still occupied in doing the work of the Lord. President Joseph F. Smith saw in a vision that Jesus Christ visited the righteous spirits in the spirit world immediately after His Crucifixion. He chose messengers to preach the gospel, gave them power and authority, and told them to “carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men.”

Priesthood responsibilities also continue in the spirit world. President Wilford Woodruff taught: “The same Priesthood exists on the other side of the veil. … Every Apostle, every Seventy, every Elder, etc., that has died in the faith as soon as he passes to the other side of the veil, enters into the work of the ministry.”

President Joseph F. Smith taught that faithful, righteous women will also be “authorized and empowered to preach the gospel and minister” in the spirit world.

Family relationships are also important in the spirit world. Those who were faithful and kept their covenants in mortality will be able to be with their families there.

Spirit Prison

The spirits of those who have died without repenting of their sins are in what the Apostle Peter referred to as spirit prison. In a figurative sense, it is a prison for those who have not received the restored gospel of Jesus Christ .

These spirits have agency and may be influenced by both good and evil. They may progress as they learn gospel principles and follow them. If they accept the gospel and the ordinances performed for them in temples, they may leave spirit prison and dwell in paradise.

Also in spirit prison are individuals who have ultimately chosen to reject the gospel of Jesus Christ after it was taught to them. These spirits suffer in a condition that is a type of hell. They have removed themselves from the mercy of Jesus Christ, who said:

“Behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

“But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

“Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit.”

These individuals will be brought to a state of repentance through their own suffering. Then, they will acknowledge the Savior as their Redeemer and through His power will be resurrected and then inherit the telestial kingdom of glory.

Related Topics

Death, Physical

Eternal Life

Heaven

Judgment

Kingdoms of Glory

Plan of Salvation

Resurrection

Spirit

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Notes

See Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Brigham Young (1997), 279 ; The Teachings of Harold B. Lee (1996), 58 .

See Alma 40:11–12 .

Doctrine and Covenants 138:30–34, 57 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 138:30 .

Wilford Woodruff, “Discourse,” Deseret News , Jan. 25, 1882, 818.

Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine , 5th ed. (1939), 461; see also Doctrine and Covenants 138:30–32, 36–52 .

See Dallin H. Oaks, “ Trust in the Lord ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2019, 28; Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2007), 175 .

See 1 Peter 3:18–20 .

Doctrine and Covenants 19:16–18 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 76:81–88 .
