Spirit (or Soul)
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/spirit?lang=eng

“Spirit (or Soul),” Topics and Questions (2025)

Overview

Spirit (or Soul)

We are all children of heavenly parents. Because of this, we have “a divine nature and destiny.” In other words, we are literally God’s spiritual daughters and sons, and we can become like Him and return to live with Him again. Before we came to earth, we existed as spirits. When we were born to mortal parents as part of God’s plan, our spirits received a physical body. 3

The scriptures teach that when we physically die, our spirit lives on. It separates from the body 4 and lives in the postmortal spirit world. During the Resurrection , our spirit is reunited with our body, “never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal.” 5

The scriptures also teach about the nature of spirits. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith , the Lord revealed that “all spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure.” 6 The Lord also revealed that “the spirit of man [is] in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created.” 7 As God’s children, our spirits, as well as our mortal bodies, are in His image—we look like He does. 8

As spirit beings, we will carry with us into the next life the knowledge and Christlike attributes we gain in mortality. 9

In scripture, the term soul is sometimes used as a synonym for spirit . It can also refer to a body and spirit together on earth. Soul can also refer to an immortal, resurrected person whose spirit and body have become inseparably united for eternity. 10

Related Topics

Children of God

Death, Physical

Eternal Life

Plan of Salvation

Premortal Life

Resurrection

Spirit World

Related Content

Scriptures

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

“ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library.

See Abraham 3:23 .

See Abraham 5:7 .

See Alma 40:11 .

Alma 11:45 .

Doctrine and Covenants 131:7 ; see also verse 8 .

Doctrine and Covenants 77:2 ; see also Ether 3:7–17 .

See Genesis 1:26–27 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 130:18–19 .

See Guide to the Scriptures, “ Soul ,” Gospel Library.
