Tattooing and Body Piercing
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/tattooing?lang=eng

“Tattooing and Body Piercing,” Topics and Questions (2026)

Overview

Tattooing and Body Piercing

Our bodies are gifts from God , and we are created in His image. We received our bodies because we accepted God’s plan of salvation in the premortal life and chose to come to earth.

Our bodies help us fulfill our purpose here on earth and prepare for eternal life. The scriptures compare the body to a temple of God. The body is like a temple for our spirit . As we care for and respect our bodies as we would a temple, we can feel closer to Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ.

President D. Todd Christofferson has taught, “As our body is the instrument of our spirit, it is vital that we care for it as best we can. We should consecrate its powers to serve and further the work of Christ.”

When making decisions about our appearance, including tattooing and body piercings, we will be blessed as we seek the Spirit’s guidance and consider whether we are treating our body the way God would want us to. The For the Strength of Youth guide explains:

“The Lord’s standard is for you to honor the sacredness of your body, even when this means being different from other people. Let this truth and the Spirit be your guide as you make decisions—especially decisions that have lasting effects on your body. Be wise and faithful, and seek counsel from your family and leaders.”

For the Strength of Youth also asks us to consider this: “As you make decisions about your clothing, hairstyle, and appearance, ask yourself, ‘Am I honoring my body as a sacred gift from God?’ Heavenly Father wants us to see each other for who we really are: not just physical bodies but His beloved children with a divine destiny.” As we follow this counsel, we will be blessed throughout our lives.

Related Topics

Modesty

Revelation

Related Content

Resources for children

Notes

See Abraham 3:26 .

See 1 Corinthians 6:19–20 .

See Russell M. Nelson, “ We Can Do Better and Be Better ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 68; Vicki F. Matsumori, “ My Body Is a Temple of God ,” Friend , Aug. 2011, 40; Russell M. Nelson, “ Decisions for Eternity ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2013, 107.

D. Todd Chritofferson, “ Reflections on a Consecrated Life ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2010, 17.

For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices (2025), 54 .

For the Strength of Youth , 52 .
