Learning and Teaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/teaching-the-gospel-study-guide?lang=eng

“Learning and Teaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Learning and Teaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ

Coming closer to Christ through His doctrine

Learning is powerful. Knowledge opens our minds to new ideas and makes many amazing experiences possible. But learning the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ is even more important. Learning and growing are some of the most important reasons we came to this earth. Learning is what enables us to become who we were truly meant to be and reach our potential as children of God and heirs of His kingdom. One of the main purposes of coming to this earth was to learn things we could not come to know otherwise.

As followers of Jesus Christ, we also have many opportunities to teach His gospel and share His peace and joy with others. The Lord told the early Saints, “Appoint among yourselves a teacher, and let not all be spokesmen at once; but let one speak at a time and let all listen unto his [or her] sayings, that when all have spoken that all may be edified of all, and that [everyone] may have an equal privilege” ( Doctrine and Covenants 88:122 ). We are all blessed as we listen to and exercise faith in the gospel message as it is taught by our Church leaders, teachers, parents, children, and others. We can all learn and teach the gospel at church, at home, and anywhere we are.

Why Is It Important to Learn the Gospel of Jesus Christ and Teach It to Others?

We study and teach the gospel to strengthen our faith in Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and the faith of those around us. It also helps us become more like Them and eventually return to our heavenly home to live with Them. When we teach the gospel, we follow the example of Jesus Christ, who was the greatest teacher. As we learn and live the gospel and then teach it to others, we can all continue on the pathway back to God.

Topic overview: Teaching the Gospel

Related gospel study guides: Conversion to Jesus Christ , Prophets , Scriptures , Truth

Section 1

We Seek Learning by Study and Faith

Through the gospel of Jesus Christ, we can progress spiritually. We learn the teachings of His gospel as we read the scriptures by study and by faith and as we follow the “voice of [His] servants” ( Doctrine and Covenants 1:38 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 88:118 ). The truths of the gospel can be confirmed to us by the Holy Spirit as we study and act on what we learn, helping us grow and become more like God (see Doctrine and Covenants 19:23 ).

Things to think about

President Russell M. Nelson taught: “Whatever questions or problems you have, the answer is always found in the life and teachings of Jesus Christ. Learn more about His Atonement, His love, His mercy, His doctrine, and His restored gospel of healing and progression. Turn to Him! Follow Him!” How have your questions and problems been answered as you have studied the Savior’s life and teachings? How has your faith helped you learn the answers you needed during those times? Consider what you could learn about the Savior this week by study and faith that could help you with a question or concern you face today. You could write a plan and then set up reminders to follow through.

Activity for learning with others

Read and ponder the Lord’s counsel in Doctrine and Covenants 88:118 . What’s the difference between learning by study and learning by faith? How do the two principles work together? Do we approach studying the gospel differently from studying at school or learning about something online? Why? And what does the Lord mean by “the best books”? You could each study a section from “ Truth Will Make You Free ” in For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices and then talk about things you learn related to the blessings of acquiring knowledge. Consider setting a goal related to something you learn.

Learn more

Alma 1:26 ; 31:5 ; Doctrine and Covenants 93:53

David A. Bednar, “ Learning in the Lord’s Way ,” Liahona , Oct. 2018, 50–53

Ulisses Soares, “ In Awe of Christ and His Gospel ,” Liahona , May 2022, 115–17

“ Invite Diligent Learning ,” Teaching in the Savior’s Way (2022), 24–27

Section 2

We Follow the Example of Jesus Christ as We Teach His Gospel

We all need “nourish[ing] by the good word of God” ( Moroni 6:4 ) to help us reach our eternal potential. Sharing the gospel of Jesus Christ can help us all progress spiritually along the covenant path. As we teach with love as led by the Spirit, all can feel the truth of the messages we share and can desire to change and follow Jesus Christ (see Doctrine and Covenants 42:12–14 ).

We follow the Savior’s example of teaching others (see John 7:14–18 ) as we love those we teach, teach by the Spirit, teach the true doctrine of Christ, and invite diligent learning. Inviting diligent learning includes encouraging learners to act. “From the beginning of His ministry, the Savior invited His followers to experience for themselves the truths, power, and love that He offered. He did this because this is what learning really is. It’s not just listening or reading; it’s also changing, repenting, and progressing.”

Things to think about

The introduction to Come, Follow Me helps us understand why teaching is a sacred responsibility. It says: “The aim of all gospel learning and teaching is to deepen our conversion and help us become more like Jesus Christ.” You could choose a section to study in Teaching in the Savior’s Way to help you teach more like Jesus Christ. How could you better teach the gospel so it leads you and others to become more like Him? What small things can you do to better teach the gospel at home, at church, or in other settings? How could you seek to learn the gospel more diligently so you can better teach it to others?

Activities for learning with others

In his general conference message “ Eternal Truth ,” Elder John C. Pingree Jr. taught: “Our aim is to teach truth in a way that invites the converting power of the Holy Ghost.” He then shared seven simple invitations from the Lord and His prophets that can help us invite the Spirit as we teach. You could discuss these seven principles and how they can help us teach the gospel with power by the Spirit. Perhaps you could come up with a fun way to help each other remember the seven principles so you can apply them, such as coming up with an acronym or other simple mnemonic device.

In Teaching in the Savior’s Way , the First Presidency invited: “Learn more about Jesus Christ and how He taught the gospel. Prayerfully study His words, His actions, and His attributes, and strive to follow Him more closely.” Discuss some of the Savior’s words, actions, and attributes. How could they help you invite the Spirit when you teach the gospel? Teaching in the Savior’s Way also shares these four principles of Christlike teaching: love those you teach, teach by the Spirit, teach the doctrine, and invite diligent learning. Talk about ways you can apply these principles as you teach gospel truths at home, at church, and elsewhere. You could also complete the personal evaluation on page 37 of Teaching in the Savior’s Way . You might discuss the insights you gain and then prayerfully consider if there are changes you may want to make in how you prepare and teach the gospel of Christ.

Learn more

John 14:16–17, 26 ; Alma 37:33–37 ; Doctrine and Covenants 11:21–22 ; 42:12–17 ; 88:122

Jeffrey R. Holland, “ A Teacher Come from God ,” Ensign , May 1998, 25–27

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ A Teacher’s Checklist ” (address given during the Teaching in the Savior’s Way broadcast, June 12, 2022), Gospel Library

Neil L. Andersen, “ The Power of Jesus Christ and Pure Doctrine ” (broadcast for teaching youth and young adults, June 11, 2023), Gospel Library

“ Invite Diligent Learning ” (video), Gospel Library

Section 3

Gospel Learning and Teaching Are Most Effective When Centered in the Home

To become converted to the Lord Jesus Christ, we need to learn the gospel for ourselves. In addition, parents are responsible to teach the gospel to their children (see Doctrine and Covenants 68:25–28 ). When possible, the home is the best setting to learn gospel truths. Everyone is blessed as Church leaders and teachers encourage and support home-centered gospel learning and teaching. As we prayerfully study the gospel in our homes, we are able to spend more time and have richer experiences learning the gospel. We can then also share that knowledge we acquire at church to bless and teach others.

Brother Devin G. Durrant gave this wise counsel: “For all of you who are striving to do your best to teach in your homes, may you find peace and joy in your efforts. And if you feel you have room for improvement or need greater preparation, please humbly respond as the Spirit prompts you and bind yourself to act.”

Things to think about

Think about the miracle of a tiny seed turning into a grand tree as you read and ponder Alma 32:28–31 . Then read this counsel from Brother Jan E. Newman: “Children inherit many things from their parents, but a testimony is not one of them. We can’t give our children a testimony any more than we can make a seed grow. But we can provide a nourishing environment, with good soil, free of thorns that would ‘choke the word.’ We can strive to create the ideal conditions so that our children—and others we love—can find place for the seed, ‘[hear] the word, and [understand] it’ [see Matthew 13:18–23 ] and discover for themselves ‘that the seed is good’ [ Alma 32:30 ].” What would help your home be a more nourishing environment for you or your family to learn eternal truths? How could you help each other learn about the goodness of the gospel? What can you do to nourish and strengthen each other’s testimonies of Christ?

Activities for learning with others

Elder David A. Bednar taught: “If all you or I know about Jesus Christ and His restored gospel is what other people teach or tell us, then the foundation of our testimony of Him and His glorious latter-day work is built upon sand [see Matthew 7:24–27 ]. We cannot rely exclusively upon or borrow gospel light and knowledge from other people—even those whom we love and trust.” Think about Elder Bednar’s words as you read Helaman 5:12 together. You could ponder and talk about this quote and verse as you look at a picture of a beach or shoreline (or as you walk the shore of a pond, stream, or lake). Think about why people don’t build their homes on the sand. What kinds of foundations do they build on? What can you do to build your testimony on a solid foundation? What habits of gospel learning might you start or recommit to following today? You could sing together a song such as “ The Wise Man and the Foolish Man ” or “ How Firm a Foundation ” as you think about building your life on the firm foundation of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Talk briefly about why people choose to remodel their homes. You could even look at some pictures of significant home renovations. What is the result of an effective home remodeling? President Nelson has taught that gospel learning “has the potential to unleash the power of families, as each family follows through conscientiously and carefully to transform their home into a sanctuary of faith. I promise that as you diligently work to remodel your home into a center of gospel learning … your children will be excited to learn and to live the Savior’s teachings. … Changes in your family will be dramatic and sustaining.” Talk with your family or others you live with about changes you all would like to see. How could you “remodel” your home to be a better center of gospel learning? How could improved, home-centered gospel study strengthen you all? What could you do to make the changes you desire, and how could you measure your progress?

Learn more

Doctrine and Covenants 93:38–49 ; Moses 6:57–62

Devin G. Durrant, “ Teaching in the Home—a Joyful and Sacred Responsibility ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2018, 42–45

Home-Centered Gospel Learning (collection of gospel study resources) , ChurchofJesusChrist.org

Other Resources about Teaching and Learning the Gospel of Jesus Christ

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders: Teaching , Learning

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Russell M. Nelson, “ The Answer Is Always Jesus Christ ,” Liahona , May 2023, 127.

See Teaching in the Savior’s Way (2022), 11–27.

Teaching in the Savior’s Way , 24 .

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Book of Mormon 2024 , v .

John C. Pingree, “ Eternal Truth ,” Liahona , Nov. 2023, 101.

See John C. Pingree, “ Eternal Truth ,” 101.

Teaching in the Savior’s Way , 1 .

See Teaching in the Savior’s Way , 3 .

Devin G. Durrant, “ Teaching in the Home—a Joyful and Sacred Responsibility ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2018, 45.

Jan E. Newman, “ Teaching in the Savior’s Way ,” Liahona , May 2021, 18.

David A. Bednar, “ Prepared to Obtain Every Needful Thing ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2019, 102.

“ The Wise Man and the Foolish Man ,” Children’s Songbook , 281.

“ How Firm a Foundation ,” Hymns , no. 85.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Becoming Exemplary Latter-day Saints ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2018, 113.
