Truth
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/truth-study-guide?lang=eng

“Truth,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Gospel Study Guide

Truth

The knowledge that leads us back to God

Our world is filled with differing views and opinions. Sometimes it is difficult to know who or what to believe. President Dieter F. Uchtdorf, while serving in the First Presidency, said: “Never in the history of the world have we had easier access to more information—some of it true, some of it false, and much of it partially true. Consequently, never in the history of the world has it been more important to learn how to correctly discern between truth and error.” By seeking reliable sources and relying on the Spirit’s guidance, we can discern what is true and what is not.

What Is Truth?

The scriptures describe truth as the “knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come” ( Doctrine and Covenants 93:24 ). Truth is compared in the scriptures to light and revelation from heaven (see Doctrine and Covenants 84:45 ; 88:66–67 ; Guide to the Scriptures, “ Truth ,” Gospel Library). The source of eternal truth is God Himself. Divine truth has been revealed in our day through the Prophet Joseph Smith and other latter-day prophets. The truths found in the gospel of Jesus Christ are essential to prepare us for salvation and exaltation (see 2 Nephi 31:19–21 ; Doctrine and Covenants 33:10–12 ).

Related gospel study guides: Conversion , Learning and Teaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ

Section 1

God Is the Source of Eternal Truth

God the Father “is full of grace and truth” ( Doctrine and Covenants 66:12 ). Jesus Christ said, “I am the way, the truth, and the life” ( John 14:6 ). He proclaims truth—often through the power of the Holy Spirit and through prophets—and cannot lie (see Jacob 4:13 ; Ether 3:12 ; Doctrine and Covenants 1:37–38 ).

The restored gospel of Jesus Christ includes the fulness of divine truth that has been revealed in our day. Divine truth is unchanging and eternal (see Doctrine and Covenants 1:39 ; 88:66 ).

God invites us to learn the divine truths about Jesus Christ, His teachings, and His atoning sacrifice. These are some of the most important truths that have been revealed (see 2 Nephi 2:6–7; 31:15, 21 ; 3 Nephi 21:6 ).

Things to think about

Not all truths are equally important. The Prophet Joseph Smith identified the most important truths in the gospel: “The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it.” You could draw a tree and write “Jesus Christ was resurrected” on the trunk. Then on the branches, or “appendages,” you could write other truths you know that grow out of this fundamental truth. What would happen if these other truths ever got separated from this fundamental truth? Why is the testimony of the prophets and apostles about Jesus and His Resurrection so important to our faith in the other truths? Ponder how you might strengthen your faith in the Savior and His Resurrection, and consider how that might nourish your faith in other gospel truths.

God wants all of His children to learn divine truth. In the Restoration proclamation, the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles have taught: “We as [Christ’s] Apostles invite all to know—as we do—that the heavens are open. We affirm that God is making known His will for His beloved sons and daughters. We testify that those who prayerfully study the message of the Restoration and act in faith will be blessed to gain their own witness of its divinity and of its purpose to prepare the world for the promised Second Coming of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.” You could search the Restoration proclamation for truths that stand out to you. Then ponder why each truth is important to know and how it might affect the choices you make.

Activity for learning with others

Read together this statement by President Russell M. Nelson:

“Contrary to the doubts of some, there really is such a thing as right and wrong. There really is absolute truth—eternal truth. One of the plagues of our day is that too few people know where to turn for truth [see Doctrine and Covenants 123:12 ]. …

“The pure doctrine of Christ is powerful. It changes the life of everyone who understands it and seeks to implement it in his or her life.”

You could work together to make a list of truths that are absolute or eternal (such as “God is our Heavenly Father”) and truths that are temporary (such as “The shirt I am wearing is red” or “It’s raining outside”). Why is it important to recognize the difference between eternal truths and temporary truths? You could also talk about where you “turn for truth”—especially for eternal truth.

Learn more

Alma 12:9–11 ; Doctrine and Covenants 45:57–59

Russell M. Nelson, “ What Is True? ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 29–30

“ God’s Words Never Cease ” (video), Gospel Library

“ Oh Say, What Is Truth? ,” Hymns , no. 272

Section 2

God Wants Us to Learn and Share Divine Truth

Our Heavenly Father wants us to know and believe the divine truths of the gospel. Our understanding of eternal truth comes from God through the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost leads us to truth (see 1 Corinthians 2:9–10, 14 ; Moroni 10:4–5 ; Doctrine and Covenants 84:44–47 ). When we choose to act based on the truth we receive, we are able to receive more truth from God (see 2 Nephi 28:30 ; Doctrine and Covenants 93:26–28 ).

God also wants those who have the truth to share it with others (see Enos 1:26 ; Doctrine and Covenants 58:47 ; 75:3–5 ). Parents, for example, are counseled to bring up their children in light and truth (see Doctrine and Covenants 93:40, 42 ). And we can also share the gospel with the many who are kept from the truth because they don’t know where to find it (see Doctrine and Covenants 123:12 ).

Things to think about

Elder John C. Pingree Jr. taught:

“God reveals doctrinal truths through prophets, and the Holy Ghost confirms those truths to us and helps us apply them. We must seek and be prepared to receive these spiritual impressions when they come. We are most receptive to the witness of the Spirit when we are humble, pray sincerely and study God’s words, and keep His commandments.

“Once the Holy Ghost confirms a specific truth to us, our understanding deepens as we put that principle into practice. Over time, as we consistently live the principle, we gain a sure knowledge of that truth.”

Consider writing down some of the truths God has revealed to you through prophets. When have you felt the Holy Ghost confirming these truths to you? How could you more intentionally prepare to receive spiritual impressions about doctrinal truths? How could you put your knowledge of these truths into practice?

Activity for learning with others

Read 2 Nephi 28:26–30 and Doctrine and Covenants 93:11–13 . Discuss what these verses teach about learning and receiving divine truth. Perhaps you could talk about other examples of things that happen or grow “line upon line” or “here a little and there a little.” What do these examples suggest about growing our knowledge of truth? Then read this counsel by President Nelson: “I plead with you now—to take charge of your own testimony of Jesus Christ and His gospel. Work for it. Nurture it so that it will grow. Feed it truth. Don’t pollute it with false philosophies of unbelieving men and women. As you make the continual strengthening of your testimony of Jesus Christ your highest priority, watch for miracles to happen in your life.” Share with each other how your testimony has grown “grace for grace” and “line upon line.” What do you feel it means to “take charge of your own testimony of Jesus Christ”? You could plant something and nurture it together and watch it grow. You could then talk about the similarities between nurturing a plant and nurturing our testimonies and the “fruits” we can harvest from each.

Learn more

John 14:16–17, 26 ; 15:26 ; 16:13–14

Alexander Dushku, “ Pillars and Rays ,” Liahona , May 2024, 14–16

Alan R. Walker, “ The Gospel Light of Truth and Love ,” Liahona , May 2021, 120–22

“ Truth Will Make You Free ,” in For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices (2022), 30–33

Section 3

Seeking Truth through Study and by Faith Can Lead Us to Spiritual Safety

The Lord invites us to “seek learning, even by study and also by faith” ( Doctrine and Covenants 88:118 ). That means, among other things, that when we have questions about the Church’s history, doctrine, and practices, we study reliable sources and exercise faith and trust in Jesus Christ as we seek answers. The adversary seeks to turn our hearts away from eternal truth (see Doctrine and Covenants 78:10 ; 93:39 ). Embracing divine truth can help us reject evil and avoid sin, error, and deception (see Doctrine and Covenants 50:23–25 ; 93:37 ).

Things to think about

As a young man, Joseph Smith felt confused as he sought answers to his spiritual questions. Read Joseph Smith—History 1:5–6, 10–13 to find out how the Lord helped him. How did his search for truth lead him to spiritual safety? What do you learn from Joseph Smith’s experience that can help you in your search for truth?

Activity for learning with others

To begin a discussion about the spiritual safety that can come from a strong testimony of truth, you could talk about things you do to be safe from accidents, illness, or natural disasters. What would we say to someone who thinks these precautions are unnecessary or not worth the effort? Then you could read together these words of President Thomas S. Monson: “We live in a time of great trouble and wickedness. What will protect us from the sin and evil so prevalent in the world today? I maintain that a strong testimony of our Savior, Jesus Christ, and of His gospel will help see us through to safety. … It is essential for you to have your own testimony in these difficult times, for the testimonies of others will carry you only so far.” Share with each other how your personal testimony of eternal truth has protected you spiritually.

Learn more

2 Nephi 31:3 ; Mosiah 12:27 ; Moses 1:12–16

Lawrence E. Corbridge, “ Stand on the Rock of Revelation ,” Ensign , Oct. 2020, 24–29

Topics and Questions, “ Consult Reliable Sources ,” Gospel Library

Other Resources about Truth

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Resources for children

Notes

Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ What Is Truth? ” (Brigham Young University devotional, Jan. 13, 2013), 3, speeches.byu.edu.

See General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , 38.8.41 , Gospel Library; see also Topics and Questions, “ Consult Reliable Sources ,” for information on finding reliable sources.

See “ The Restoration of the Fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: A Bicentennial Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Joseph Smith (2011), 49 .

“ The Restoration of the Fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ .”

Russell M. Nelson, “ Pure Truth, Pure Doctrine, and Pure Revelation ,” Liahona , Nov. 2021, 6.

John C. Pingree Jr., “ Eternal Truth ,” Liahona , Nov. 2023, 100.

Russell M. Nelson, “ Overcome the World and Find Rest ,” Liahona , Nov. 2022, 97.

See General Handbook , 38.8.41 .

Thomas S. Monson, “ The Power of the Book of Mormon ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2017, 86–87.
