Unity
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/unity?lang=eng

“Unity,” Topics and Questions (2023)

Overview

Unity

Just before the Savior carried out the Atonement , He prayed for His disciples, whom He had sent into the world to teach the gospel . He also prayed for those who would believe in Him because of His disciples’ words. He pleaded for unity: “That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.” 1 From this prayer we learn how the gospel unites us with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and with each other. When we live the gospel, receiving the saving ordinances and keeping our covenants , our natures are changed. The Savior’s Atonement sanctifies us, and we can live in unity, enjoying peace in this life and preparing to dwell with the Father and His Son forever.

The Lord has said, “If ye are not one ye are not mine.” 2 We can seek and promote this standard of unity in our families and in the Church. If we are married , we and our spouse can be unified in purpose and action. We can allow our unique qualities to complement one another as we face challenges together and grow in love and understanding. We can also be unified with other family members and with members of the Church by serving together, teaching one another, and encouraging one another. We can become one with the President of the Church and other Church leaders as we study their words and follow their counsel.

As the Church grows throughout the world, all Latter-day Saints can be united. Our hearts can be “knit together in unity and in love one towards another.” 3 We appreciate cultural diversity and individual differences, but we also seek the “unity of the faith” that comes when we follow inspired leaders and remember that we are all children of the same Father. 4

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Videos

Notes

John 17:21 .

Doctrine and Covenants 38:27 .

Mosiah 18:21 .

See Ephesians 4:3–6, 11–13 .
