Virtue
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/virtue?lang=eng

“Virtue,” Topics and Questions (2026)

Overview

Virtue

Virtue is a word we don’t hear often, but the Latin root word virtus means strength. When we are virtuous, we receive strength from the Lord. Striving to be virtuous also requires inner strength. Being virtuous means continually trying to make Christlike choices that bring us closer to God. Having virtue means we try to do what God would want us to.

Virtue begins in the heart and in the mind. Being virtuous is the result of many small decisions and actions. Virtuous people have high moral standards, such as being just, honest, and compassionate. These standards determine their motives, words, and actions. Virtuous people try to be chaste and morally pure.

When we are virtuous, we can have confidence that we are worthy to receive and be guided by the promptings of the Holy Ghost . Children and youth can learn about virtue from loving family members, friends, and teachers.

The Lord welcomes to His holy temples those who are virtuous and who “love what He loves: humility, meekness, steadfastness, charity, courage, compassion, forgiveness, and obedience.” We strive to follow His example as we seek these traits.

Virtue is one of the greatest qualities we can possess. Our desire to be virtuous can guide us as we make choices throughout our life. President Thomas S. Monson counseled: “ You be the one to make a stand for right, even if you stand alone. Have the moral courage to be a light for others to follow. There is no friendship more valuable than your own clear conscience, your own moral cleanliness—and what a glorious feeling it is to know that you stand in your appointed place clean and with the confidence that you are worthy to do so.”

Related Topics

Chastity

Covenant

Obedience

Repentance

Revelation

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

See Articles of Faith 1:13 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 121:45–46 .

Ronald A. Rasband, “ Recommended to the Lord ,” Ensign or Liahona , Nov. 2020, 23.

Thomas S. Monson, “ Examples of Righteousness ,” Ensign or Liahona , May 2008, 65.
