War
Source: https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/manual/gospel-topics/war?lang=eng

“War,” Topics and Questions (2026)

Overview

War

The Lord has said that in the last days, because of the wickedness of some people, there will be “wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men’s hearts shall fail them.” As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we seek to be people of peace. We follow the Savior , who is the Prince of Peace. We look forward to His millennial reign, when wars will end and peace will be restored to the earth.

However, we recognize that government leaders sometimes send military troops to war to defend their nations and ideals. In the Church, “we believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law.” Military service shows that we follow this principle. Many Latter-day Saints choose to join the military to help defend their countries from possible threats and preserve their freedoms. In situations where our desire for peace and our obligation to our country seem to contradict, we can seek the Lord’s guidance and follow His Spirit.

Sometimes Latter-day Saints are required to go to battle by their country and have to fight or kill in the line of duty. They can look to the example of Captain Moroni, a great military leader in the Book of Mormon . Although he was a mighty warrior, he “did not delight in bloodshed.” He was a righteous man of God, “firm in the faith of Christ,” and he desired to “defend his people, his rights, and his country, and his religion.”

If Latter-day Saints must go to war, they should go in a spirit of truth, humility, and righteousness, striving to follow the Savior even in difficult circumstances. They should have love for all God’s children—even those on the opposing side—and seek to preserve life whenever possible. When they act under lawful duty and necessity and not from personal anger or animosity, they will not be held accountable for blood they are required to shed.

Related Topics

Adversity

Peace

Religion versus Violence

Related Content

Scriptures

Messages from Church leaders

Hymns and children’s songs

Notes

Doctrine and Covenants 45:26 .

See Russell M. Nelson, “ Peacemakers Needed ,” Liahona , May 2023, 98–101.

See Isaiah 2:2, 4 .

Articles of Faith 1:12 .

See the question “ What is the Church’s position on war and military service? ” in Topics and Questions, “Religion versus Violence,” Gospel Library.

Alma 48:11 .

Alma 48:13 .
